The Immortals of Meluha
by Amish Tripathi
 
‘Shiva rocks. Just how much Shiva rocks the imagination is made grandiosely obvious
in The Immortals of Meluha ... Shiva’s journey from cool dude... to Mahadev... is a
reader’s delight... What really engages is the author’s crafting of Shiva, with almost boyworship joy’
— The Times of India

 
‘The story is gripping and well-paced. An essentially mythological story written in a
modern style, the novel creates anticipation in the readers mind and compels one to
read with great curiosity till the end. The end however is a cliff-hanger and leaves one
thirsting for more.’
— Business World

 
‘Amongst the top 5 books recommended

by Brunch... the story is fascinating.’
— The Hindustan Times

 
‘...has philosophy as its underlying theme but is racy enough to give its readers the
adventure of a lifetime.’
— The Hindu

 
‘Amongst the list of favourite holiday books of 2010. A fast paced story, you are bound
to read it cover to cover in one sitting.’
— The Deccan Chronicle

 
‘Much before the box-office verdict on Rajneeti
and Raavan became apparent, Indian
readers gave a thumbs-up to The Immortals Of Meluha.
Its author Amish, an IIM
graduate, created a delightful mix of mythology and history by making Lord Shiva the
hero of his trilogy. The first part has been on the Indian bestseller charts for quite some
time now.’
— The Indian Express

 
‘...to me, The Immortals of Meluha
is a political commentary with messages for our
world and a hope that since they flow from the Mahadev himself, they will find greater
acceptance. Be it the interpretation of Shiva’s battle cry — Har Har Mahadev as Every
man a Mahadev or the valour of Sati who fights her own battles — every passage is rich
in meaning and yet, open to interpretation. Therein lies the strength of this book.’
— Indiareads.com

 
‘...wonderful book, replete with action, love and adventure, and extolling virtues and
principles... The author has succeeded in making many mythological figures into simple
flesh and blood human beings, and therein lie(s) the beauty and the acceptability of this
book.’

 — The Afternoon

 
‘The author takes myth and contemporises it, raising questions about all that we hold
true and familiar. The book is (a) marvellous attempt to create fiction from folklore,
religion and archaeological facts.’
— People

 
‘The Immortals of Meluha... sees Lord Shiva and his intriguing life with a refreshing
perspective... beautifully written creation... Simply unputdownable for any lover of Indian
history and mythology.’
— Society

 
For detailed reviews, please visit
www.shivatrilogy.com

  westland
ltd
Venkat
Towers,
165,
P.H.
Road,
MaduravoyaLChennai
600
095
No.38/10
(New
No.5),
Raghava
Nagat,
New
Timber
Yard
Layout,
Bangalore
560
026
Survey
No.
A-9,
II Floor,
Moula
Ali Industrial
Area,
Moula
Ali,
Hyderabad
500
040
23/181, Anand Nagar,
Nehru Road,
Santacruz
East,
Mumbai
400 055
4322/3, Ansari Road, Daryaganj, New Delhi 110 002
First published by Tara Press 2010
Published by westland ltd 2010
Copyright © Amish Tripathi 2008
All rights reserved

 
Amish Tripathi asserts the moral right to be identified as the author of this work.
This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places and incidents are either the product
of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously and any resemblance to any actual
person living or dead, events and locales is entirely coincidental.

 
Cover
Design
by
Rashmi
Pusalkar.
Photo
of
Lord
Shiva
by
Vikram
Bawa.
Photo of Kailash Mansarovar by Silvio Giroud.
Typeset
in
Garamond
by
Manju
Printed at Manipal Technologies Ltd., Manipal
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by any way of trade or
otherwise, be lent, resold, hired out, or otherwise circulated without the author’s prior
written consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published
and without a similar condition including this condition being imposed on the
subsequent purchaser and without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above,
no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior written permission of the
copyright owner, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles or
reviews with appropriate citations.

 To Preeti & Neel...
You both are everything to me,
My words & their meaning,
My prayer & my blessing,
My moon & my sun,
My love & my life,
My soul mate & a part of my soul.

 Om Namah Shivaiy.
The universe bows to Lord Shiva. I bow to Lord Shiva.

  
Contents
 

  
Acknowledgements
 
They say that writing is a lonely profession. They lie. An outstanding group of people
have come together to make this book possible. And I would like to thank them.
Preeti, my wife, a rare combination of beauty, brains and spirit who assisted and
advised me through all aspects of this book.
My family, a cabal of supremely positive individuals who encouraged, pushed and
supported me through the long years of this project.
My first publisher and agent, Anuj Bahri, for his absolute confidence in the Shiva Trilogy.
My present publishers Westland Ltd, led by Gautam Padmanabhan, for sharing a dream
with me.
Sharvani Pandit and Gauri Dange, my editors, for making my rather pedestrian English
vastiy better and for improving the story flow.
Rashmi Pusalkar, Sagar Pusalkar and Vikram Bawa for the exceptional cover.
Atul Manjrekar, Abhijeet Powdwal, Rohan Dhuri and Amit Chitnis for the innovative
trailer film, which has helped market the book at a whole new level. And Taufiq Qureshi,
for the music of the trailer film.
Mohan Vijayan for his great work on press publicity.
Alok Kalra, Hrishikesh Sawant and Mandar Bhure for their effective advice on marketing
and promotions.
Donetta Ditton & Mukul Mukherjee for the website.
You, the reader, for the leap of faith in picking up the book of a debut author.
And lastly, I believe that this story is a blessing to me from Lord Shiva. Humbled by this
experience, I find myself a different man today, less cynical and more accepting of
different world views. Hence, most importantly, I would like to bow to Lord Shiva, for
blessing me so abundantly, far beyond what I deserve.

  
The Shiva Trilogy
 
Shiva! The Mahadev. The God of Gods. Destroyer of Evil. Passionate lover. Fierce
warrior. Consummate dancer. Charismatic leader. All-powerful, yet incorruptible. Quick
wit, accompanied by an equally quick and fearsome temper.
Over the centuries, no foreigner who came to our land — conqueror, merchant, scholar,
ruler, traveller — believed that such a great man could possibly exist in reality. They
assumed that he must have been a mythical God, whose existence could be possible
only in the realms of human imagination. Unfortunately, this belief became our received
wisdom.
But what if we are wrong? What if Lord Shiva was not a figment of a rich imagination,
but a person of flesh and blood? Like you and me. A man who rose to become godlike
because of his karma. That is the premise of the Shiva Trilogy, which interprets the rich
mythological heritage of ancient India, blending fiction with historical fact.
This work is therefore a tribute to Lord Shiva and the lesson that his life teaches us. A
lesson lost in the depths of time and ignorance. A lesson, that all of us can rise to be
better people. A lesson, that there exists a potential god in every single human being.
All we have to do is listen to ourselves.
The Immortals of Meluha is the first book in the trilogy that chronicles the journey of this
extraordinary hero. Two more books are to follow: The Secret of the Nagas and The
Oath of the Vayuputras .

  
CHAPTER 1
He has come!
 
1900 BC, Mansarovar Lake(At the foot of Mount Kailash, Tibet)
Shiva gazed at the orange sky. The clouds hovering above Mansarovar had just parted
to reveal the setting sun. The brilliant giver of life was calling it a day once again. Shiva
had seen a few sunrises in his twenty-one years. But the sunset! He tried never to miss
the sunset! On any other day, Shiva would have taken in the vista — the sun and the
immense lake against the magnificent backdrop of the Himalayas stretching as far back
as the eye could see. But not today.
He squatted and perched his lithe, muscular body on the narrow ledge extending over
the lake. The numerous batde-scars on his skin gleamed in the shimmering reflected
light of the waters. Shiva remembered well his carefree childhood days. He had
perfected the art of throwing pebbles that bounced off the surface of the lake. He still
held the record in his tribe for the highest number of bounces: seventeen.
On a normal day, Shiva would have smiled at the memory from a cheerful past that had
been overwhelmed by the angst of the present. But today, he turned back towards his
village without any hint of joy.
Bhadra was alert, guarding the main entrance. Shiva gestured with his eyes. Bhadra
turned back to find his two back-up soldiers dozing against the fence. He cursed and
kicked them hard.
Shiva turned back towards the lake.
God bless Bhadra! At least he takes some responsibility.
Shiva brought the chillum made of yak-bone to his hps and took in a deep drag. Any
other day, the marijuana would have spread its munificence, dulling his troubled mind
and letting him find some moments of solace. But not today.
He looked left, at the edge of the lake where the soldiers of the strange foreign visitor
were kept under guard. With the lake behind them and twenty of Shiva’s own soldiers
guarding them, it was impossible for them to mount any surprise attack.
They let themselves be disarmed so easily. They aren’t like the bloodthirsty idiots in our
land who are looking for any excuse to fight.
The foreigner’s words came flooding back to Shiva. ‘Come to our land. It lies beyond the
great mountains. Others call it Meluha. I call it Heaven. It is the richest and most
powerful empire in India. Indeed the richest and most powerful in the whole world. Our
government has an offer for immigrants. You will be given fertile land and resources for
farming. Today, your tribe, the Gunas, fight for survival in this rough, arid land. Meluha
offers you a lifestyle beyond your wildest dreams. We ask for nothing in return. Just live
in peace, pay your taxes and follow the laws of the land.’
Shiva mused that he would certainly not be a chief in this new land.
Would I really miss that so much?
His tribe would have to live by the laws of the foreigners. They would have to work
every day for a living.
That’s better than fighting every day just to stay alive!
Shiva took another puff from his chillum. As the smoke cleared, he turned to stare at the
hut in the centre of his village, right next to his own, where the foreigner had been
stationed. He had been told that he could sleep there in comfort. In fact, Shiva wanted
to keep him hostage. Just in case.

 We fight almost every month with the Pakratis just so that our village can exist next to
the holy lake. They are getting stronger every year, forming new alliances with new
tribes. We can beat the Pakratis, but not all the mountain tribes together! By moving to
Meluha, we can escape this pointless violence and may be live a life of comfort. What
could possibly be wrong with that? Why shouldn’t we take this deal? It sounds so damn
good!
Shiva took one last drag from the chillum before banging it on the rock, letting the ash
slip out and rose quickly from his perch. Brushing a few specks of ash from his bare
chest, he wiped his hands on his tiger skin skirt, rapidly striding to his village. Bhadra
and his back-up stood to attention as Shiva passed the gate. Shiva frowned and
gestured for Bhadra to ease up.
Why does he keep forgetting that he has been my closestfriend since childhood? My
becoming the chief hasn’t really changed anything. He doesn’t need to behave
unnecessarily servile in front of others.
The huts in Shiva’s village were luxurious compared to others in their land. A grown
man could actually stand upright in them. The shelter could withstand the harsh
mountain winds for nearly three years before surrendering to the elements. He flung the
empty chillum into his hut as he strode to the hut where the visitor lay sleeping soundly.
Either he doesn’t realise he is a hostage. Or he genuinely believes that good behaviour
begets good behaviour.
Shiva remembered what his uncle, also his Guru, used to say. ‘People do what their
society rewards them to do. If the society rewards trust, people will be trusting.’
Meluha must he a trusting society if it teaches even its soldiers to expect the best in
strangers.
Shiva scratched his shaggy beard as he stared hard at the visitor.
He had said his name was Nandi.
The Meluhan’s massive proportions appeared even more enormous as he sprawled on
the floor in his stupor, his immense belly jiggling with every breath. Despite being
obese, his skin was taut and toned. His child-like face looked even more innocent
asleep, with his mouth half open.
Is this the man who will lead me to my destiny? Do I really have the destiny my uncle
spoke of?
‘Your destiny is much larger than these massive mountains. But to make it come true,
you will have to cross these very same massive mountains.’
Do I deserve a good destiny? My people come first. Will they be happy in Meluha?
Shiva continued to stare at the sleeping Nandi. Then he heard the sound of a conch
shell.
Pakratis!
‘POSITIONS!’ screamed Shiva, as he drew his sword.
Nandi was up in an instant, drawing a hidden sword from his fur coat kept to the side.
They sprinted to the village gates. Following standard protocol, the women started
rushing to the village centre, carrying their children along. The men ran the other way,
swords drawn.
‘Bhadra! Our soldiers at the lake!’ shouted Shiva as he reached the entrance.
Bhadra relayed the orders and the Guna soldiers obeyed instantly. They were surprised
to see the Meluhans draw weapons hidden in their coats and rush to the village. The
Pakratis were upon them within moments.
It was a well-planned ambush by the Pakratis. Dusk was usually a time when the Guna
soldiers took time to thank their gods for a day without battle. The women did their
chores by the lakeside. If there was a time of weakness for the formidable Gunas, a
time when they weren’t a fearsome martial clan, but just another mountain tribe trying to
survive in a tough, hostile land, this was it.

 But fate was against the Pakratis yet again. Thanks to the foreign presence, Shiva had
ordered the Gunas to remain alert. Thus they were forewarned and the Pakratis lost the
element of surprise. The presence of the Meluhans was also decisive, turning the tide of
the short, brutal battle in favour of the Gunas. The Pakratis had to retreat.
Bloodied and scarred, Shiva surveyed the damage at the end of the battle. Two Guna
soldiers had succumbed to their injuries. They would be honoured as clan heroes. But
even worse, the warning had come too late for at least ten Guna women and children.
Their mutilated bodies were found next to the lake. The losses were high.
Bastards They kill women and children when they can’t beat us!
A livid Shiva called the entire tribe to the centre of the village. His mind was made.
‘This land is fit for barbarians! We have fought pointless battles with no end in sight. You
know my uncle tried to make peace, even offering access to the lake shore to the
mountain tribes. But these scum mistook our desire for peace as weakness. We all
know what followed!’
The Gunas, despite being used to the brutality of regular battle, were shell-shocked by
the viciousness of the attack on the women and children.
‘I keep nothing secret from you. All of you know the invitation of the foreigners,’
continued Shiva, pointing to Nandi and the Meluhans. ‘They fought shoulder-to-shoulder
with us today. They have earned my trust. I want to go with them to Meluha. But this
cannot be my decision alone.’
‘You are our chief, Shiva,’ said Bhadra. ‘Your decision is our decision. That is the
tradition.’
‘Not this time,’ said Shiva holding out his hand. ‘This will change our lives completely. I
believe the change will be for the better. Anything will be better than the pointlessness
of the violence we face daily. I have told you what I want to do. But the choice to go or
not is yours. Let the Gunas speak. This time, I follow you.’
The Gunas were clear on their tradition. But the respect for Shiva was not just based on
convention, but also on his character. He had led the Gunas to their greatest military
victories through his genius and sheer personal bravery.
They spoke in one voice. ‘Your decision is our decision.’

 
It had been five days since Shiva had uprooted his tribe. The caravan had camped in a
nook at the base of one of the great valleys dotting the route to Meluha. Shiva had
organized the camp in three concentric circles. The yaks had been tied around the
outermost circle, to act as an alarm in case of any intruders. The men were stationed in
the intermediate ring to fight if there was a battle. And the women and children were in
the innermost circle, just around the fire. Expendable first, defenders second and the
most vulnerable at the inside.
Shiva was prepared for the worst. He believed that there would be an ambush. It was
only a matter of time.
The Pakratis should have been delighted to have access to the prime lands, as well as
free occupation of the lake front. But Shiva knew that Yakhya, the Pakrati chief, would
not allow them to leave peacefully. Yakhya would like nothing better than to become a
legend by claiming that he had defeated Shiva’s Gunas and won the land for the
Pakratis. It was precisely this weird tribal logic that Shiva detested. In an atmosphere
like this, there was never any hope for peace.
Shiva relished the call of battle, revelled in its art. But he also knew that ultimately, the
battles in his land were an exercise in futility.
He turned to an alert Nandi sitting some distance away. The twenty-five Meluhan
soldiers were seated in an arc around a second camp circle.

 Why did he pick the Gunas to immigrate? Why not the Pakratis?
Shiva’s thoughts were broken as he saw a shadow move in the distance. He stared
hard, but everything was still. Sometimes the light played tricks in this part of the world.
Shiva relaxed his stance.
And then he saw the shadow again.
‘TO ARMS!’ screamed Shiva.
The Gunas and Meluhans drew their weapons and took up battle positions as fifty
Pakratis charged in. The stupidity of rushing in without thought hit them hard as they
met with a wall of panicky animals. The yaks bucked and kicked uncontrollably, injuring
many Pakratis before they could even begin their skirmish. A few slipped through. And
weapons clashed.
A young Pakrati, obviously a novice, charged at Shiva, swinging wildly. Shiva stepped
back, avoiding the strike. He brought his sword back up in a smooth arc, inflicting a
superficial cut on the Pakrati’s chest. The young warrior cursed and swung back,
opening his flank. That was all Shiva needed. He pushed his sword in brutally, cutting
through the gut of his enemy. Almost instantly, he pulled the blade out, twisting it as he
did, and left the Pakrati to a slow, painful death. Shiva turned around to find a Pakrati
ready to strike a Guna. He jumped high and swung from the elevation slicing neatly
through the Pakrati’s sword arm, severing it.
Meanwhile Bhadra, as adept at the art of battle as Shiva, was fighting two Pakratis
simultaneously, with a sword in each hand. His hump did not seem to impeded his
movements as he transferred his weight easily, striking the Pakrati on his left on his
throat. Leaving him to die slowly, he swung with his right hand, cutting across the face
of the other soldier, gouging his eye out. As the soldier fell, Bhadra brought his left
sword down brutally, ending the suffering quickly for this hapless enemy.
The battle at the Meluhan end of camp was very different. They were exceptionally welltrained soldiers. But they were not vicious. They were following rules, avoiding killing, as
far as possible.
Outnumbered and led poorly, it was but a short while before the Pakratis were beaten.
Almost half of them lay dead and the rest were on their knees, begging for mercy.
One of them was Yakhya, his shoulder cut deep by Nandi, debilitating the movement of
his sword arm.
Bhadra stood behind the Pakrati chief, his sword raised high, ready to strike. ‘Shiva,
quick and easy or slow and painful?’
‘Sir!’ intervened Nandi, before Shiva could speak. Shiva turned towards the Meluhan.
‘This is wrong! They are begging for mercy! Killing them is against the rules of war.’
‘You don’t know the Pakratis!’ said Shiva. ‘They are brutal. They will keep attacking us
even if there is nothing to gain. This has to end. Once and for all.’
‘It is already ending. You are not going to live here anymore. You will soon be in
Meluha.’
Shiva stood silent.
Nandi continued, ‘How you want to end this is up to you. More of the same or different?’
Bhadra looked at Shiva. Waiting.
‘You can show the Pakratis that you are better,’ said Nandi. Shiva turned towards the
horizon, seeing the massive mountains.
Destiny? Chance of a better life?
He turned back to Bhadra. ‘Disarm them. Take all their provisions. Release them.’
Even if the Pakratis are mad enough to go back to their village, rearm and come back,
we would be long gone.
A shocked Bhadra stared at Shiva. But immediately started implementing the order.
Nandi gazed at Shiva with hope. There was but one thought that reverberated through
his mind. ‘Shiva has the heart. He has the potential. Please, let it be him. I pray to you

 Lord Ram, let it be him.’
Shiva walked back to the young soldier he had stabbed. He lay writhing on the ground,
face contorted in pain, as blood oozed slowly out of his guts. For this first time in his life,
Shiva felt pity for a Pakrati. He drew his sword and ended the young soldier’s suffering.

 
After marching continuously for four weeks, the caravan of invited immigrants crested
the final mountain to reach the outskirts of Srinagar, the capital of the valley of Kashmir.
Nandi had talked excitedly about the glories of his perfect land. Shiva had prepared
himself to see some incredible sights, which he could not have imagined in his simple
homeland. But nothing could have primed him for the sheer spectacle of what certainly
was paradise. Meluha . The land of pure life!
The mighty Jhelum river, a roaring tigress in the mountains, slowed down to the beat of
a languorous cow as she entered the valley. She caressed the heavenly land of
Kashmir, meandering her way into the immense Dal Lake. Further down, she broke
away from the lake, continuing her journey to the sea.
The vast valley was covered by a lush green canvas of grass. On it was painted the
masterpiece that was Kashmir. Rows upon rows of flowers arrayed all of God’s colours,
their brilliance broken only by the soaring Chinar trees, offering a majestic, yet warm
Kashmiri welcome. The melodious singing of the birds calmed the exhausted ears of
Shiva’s tribe, accustomed only to the rude howling of icy mountain winds.
‘If this is the border province, how perfect must the rest of the country be?’ whispered
Shiva in awe.
The Dal Lake was the site of an ancient army camp of the Meluhans. Upon the western
banks of the lake, by the side of the Jhelum lay the frontier town that had grown beyond
its simple encampments into the grand Srinagar . Literally, the ‘respected
city’ .
Srinagar had been raised upon a massive platform of almost a hundred hectares in
size. The platform built of earth, towered almost five metres high. On top of the platform
were the city walls, which were another twenty metres in height and four metres thick.
The simplicity and brilliance of building an entire city on a platform astounded the
Gunas. It was a strong protection against enemies who would have to fight up a fort wall
which was essentially solid ground. The platform served another vital purpose: it raised
the ground level of the city, an extremely effective strategy against the recurrent floods
in this land. Inside the fort walls, the city was divided into blocks by roads laid out in a
neat grid pattern. It had specially constructed market areas, temples, gardens, meeting
halls and everything else that would be required for sophisticated urban living. All the
houses looked like simple multiple-storeyed block structures from the outside. The only
way to differentiate a rich man’s house was that his block would be bigger.
In contrast to the extravagant natural landscape of Kashmir, the city of Srinagar itself
was painted only in restrained greys, blues and whites. The entire city was a picture of
cleanliness, order and sobriety. Nearly twenty thousand souls called Srinagar their
home. Now an additional two hundred had just arrived from Mount Kailash. And their
leader felt a lightness of being he hadn’t experienced since that terrible day, many years
ago.
I have escaped. I can make a new beginning. I can forget.

 
The caravan travelled to the immigrant camp outside Srinagar. The camp had been built
on a separate platform on the southern side of the city. Nandi led Shiva and his tribe to

 the Foreigners’ Office, which was placed just outside the camp. Nandi requested Shiva
to wait outside as he went into the office. He soon returned, accompanied by a young
official. The official gave a practised smile and folded his hands in a formal namaste.
‘Welcome to Meluha. I am Chitraangadh. I will be your Orientation Executive. Think of
me as your single point of contact for all issues whilst you are here. I believe your
leader’s name is Shiva. Will he step up please?’
Shiva took a step forward. ‘I am Shiva.’
‘Excellent,’ said Chitraangadh. ‘Would you be so kind as to follow me to the registration
desk please? You will be registered as the caretaker of your tribe. Any communication
that concerns them will go through you. Since you are the designated leader, the
implementation of all directives within your tribe would be your responsibility’
Nandi cut into Chitraangadh’s officious speech to tell Shiva, ‘Sir, if you will just excuse
me, I will go to the immigrant camp quarters and arrange the temporary living
arrangements for your tribe.’
Shiva noticed that Chitraangadh’s ever-beaming face had lost its smile for a fraction of a
second as Nandi interrupted his flow. But he recovered quickly and the smile returned to
his face once again. Shiva turned and looked at Nandi.
‘Of course, you may. You don’t need to take my permission, Nandi,’ said Shiva. ‘But in
return, you have to promise me something, my friend.’
‘Of course, Sir,’ replied Nandi bowing slightly.
‘Call me Shiva. Not Sir,’ grinned Shiva. ‘I am your friend. Not your Chief.’
A surprised Nandi looked up, bowed again and said, ‘Yes Sir. I mean, yes, Shiva.’
Shiva turned back to Chitraangadh, whose smile for some reason appeared more
genuine now. He said, ‘Well Shiva, if you will follow me to the registration desk, we will
complete the formalities quickly.’

 
The newly registered tribe reached the residential quarters in the immigration camp, to
see Nandi waiting outside the main gates; he led them in. The roads of the camp were
just like those of Srinagar. They were laid out in a neat north-south and east-west grid.
The carefully paved footpaths contrasted sharply with the dirt tracks in Shiva’s own
land. He noticed something strange about the road though.
‘Nandi, what are those differently coloured stones running through the centre of the
road?’ asked Shiva.
‘They cover the underground drains, Shiva. The drains take all the waste water of the
camp out. It ensures that the camp remains clean and hygienic’
Shiva marvelled at the almost obsessively meticulous planning of the Meluhans.
The Gunas reached the large building that had been assigned to them. For the
umpteenth time, they thanked the wisdom of their leader in deciding to come to Meluha.
The three—storeyed building had comfortable, separate living quarters for each family.
Each room had luxurious furniture including a highly polished copper plate on the wall
on which they could see their reflection. The rooms had clean linen bed sheets, towels
and even some clothes. Feeling the cloth, a bewildered Shiva asked, ‘What is this
material?’
Chitraangadh replied enthusiastically, ‘It’s cotton, Shiva. The plant is grown in our lands
and fashioned into the cloth that you hold.’
There was a broad picture window on each wall to allow the light and the warmth of the
sun. Notches on each wall supported a metal rod with a controlled flame on top for
lighting. Each room had an attached bathroom with a sloping floor that enabled the
water to flow naturally to a hole which drained it out. At the right end of each bathroom
was a paved basin on the ground which culminated in a large hole. The purpose of this

 contraption was a mystery to the tribe. The side walls had some kind of device, which
when turned, allowed water to flow through.
‘Magic!’ whispered Bhadra’s mother.
Beside the main door of the building was an attached house. A doctor and her nurses
walked out of the house to greet Shiva. The doctor, a petite, wheat-skinned woman was
dressed in a simple white cloth tied around her waist and legs in a style the Meluhans
called dhoti . A smaller white cloth was tied as a blouse around her chest while another
cloth called an angvastram
was draped over her shoulders. The centre of her forehead
bore a white dot. Her head had been shaved clean except for a knotted tuft of hair at the
back, called a choti . A loose string called a janau was tied down from her left shoulder
across her torso to the right side.
Nandi was genuinely starded at seeing her. With a reverential namaste, he said, ‘Lady
Ayurvati! I didn’t expect a doctor of your stature here.’
Ayurvati looked at Nandi with a smile and a polite namaste. ‘I strongly believe in the
field-work experience programme, Captain. My team follows it strictly. However, I am
terribly sorry but I didn’t recognise you. Have we met before?’
‘My name is Captain Nandi, my lady,’ answered Nandi. We haven’t met but who doesn’t
know you, the greatest doctor in the land?’
‘Thank you, Captain Nandi,’ said a visibly embarrassed
Ayurvati. ‘But I think you
exaggerate. There are many far superior to me.’ Turning quickly towards Shiva, Ayurvati
continued, ‘Welcome to Meluha. I am Ayurvati, your designated doctor. My nurses and I
will be at your assistance for the time that you are in these quarters.’
Hearing no reaction from Shiva, Chitraangadh said in his most earnest voice, ‘These
are just temporary quarters, Shiva. The actual houses that will be allocated to your tribe
will be much more comfortable. You have to stay here only for the period of the
quarantine which will not last more than seven days.’
‘Oh no, my friend! The quarters are more than comfortable. They are beyond anything
that we could have imagined. What say Mausi?’
grinned Shiva at Bhadra’s mother,
before turning back to Chitraangadh with a frown. ‘But why the quarantine?’
Nandi cut in. ‘Shiva, the quarantine is just a precaution. We don’t have too many
diseases in Meluha. Sometimes, immigrants may come in with new diseases. During
this seven—day period, the doctors will observe and cure you of any such ailments.’
‘And one of the guidelines that you have to follow to control diseases is to maintain strict
hygiene standards,’ said Ayurvati.
Shiva grimaced at Nandi and whispered, ‘Hygiene standards?’
Nandi’s forehead crinkled into an apologetic frown while his hands gently advised
acquiescence. He mumbled, ‘Please go along with it, Shiva. It is just one of those things
that we have to do in Meluha. Lady Ayurvati is considered to be the best doctor in the
land.’
‘If you are free right now, I can give you your instructions,’ said Ayurvati.
‘I am free right now,’ said Shiva with a straight face. ‘But I may have to charge you
later.’
Bhadra giggled softly, while Ayurvati stared at Shiva with a blank face, clearly not
amused at the pun.
‘I don’t understand what you’re trying to say,’ said Ayurvati frostily. ‘In any case, we will
begin at the bathroom.’
Ayurvati walked into the guest house, muttering under her breath, ‘These uncouth
immigrants...’
Shiva raised his eyebrows towards Bhadra, grinning impishly.

 

 Late in the evening, after a hearty meal, all the Gunas were served a medicinal drink in
their rooms.
‘Yuck!’ grimaced Bhadra, his face contorted. ‘This tastes like Yak’s piss!’
‘How do you know what yak’s piss tastes like?’ laughed Shiva, as he slapped his friend
hard on the back. ‘Now go to your room. I need to sleep.’
‘Have you seen the beds? I think this is going to be the best sleep of my life!’
‘I have seen the bed, dammit!’ grinned Shiva. ‘Now I want to experience it. Get out!’
Bhadra left Shiva’s room, laughing loudly. He wasn’t the only one excited by the
unnaturally soft beds. Their entire tribe had rushed to their rooms for what they
anticipated would be the most comfortable sleep of their lives. They were in for a
surprise.

 
Shiva tossed and turned on his bed constantly. He was wearing an orange coloured
dhoti. The tiger skin had been taken away to be washed — for hygienic reasons. His
cotton angvastram was lying on a low chair by the wall. A half lit chillum lay forlorn on
the side-table.
This cursed bed is too soft. Impossible to sleep on!
Shiva yanked the bed sheet off the mattress, tossed it on the floor and lay down. This
was a little better. Sleep was stealthily creeping in on him. But not as strongly as at
home. He missed the rough cold floor of his own hut. He missed the shrill winds of
Mount Kailash, which broke through the most determined efforts to ignore them. He
missed the comforting stench of his tiger skin. No doubt, his current surroundings were
excessively comfortable, but they were unfamiliar and alien.
As usual, it was his instincts which brought up the truth:
‘It’s not the room.It’s you.’
It was then that Shiva noticed that he was sweating. Despite the cool breeze, he was
sweating profusely. The room appeared to be spinning lightly. He felt as if his body was
being drawn out of itself. His frostbitten right toe felt as if it was on fire. His battle
scarred left knee seemed to be getting stretched. His tired and aching muscles felt as if
a great hand was remoulding them. His shoulder bone, dislocated in days past and
never completely healed, appeared to be ripping the muscles aside so as to re-engineer
the joint. The muscles in turn seemed to be giving way to the bones to do their job.
Breathing was an effort. He opened his mouth to help his lungs along. But not enough
air flowed in. Shiva concentrated with all his might, opened his mouth wide and sucked
in as much air as he could. The curtains by the side of the window rustled as a kindly
wind rushed in. With the sudden gush of air, Shiva’s body relaxed just a bit. And then
the battle began again. He focused and willed giant gasps of air into his hungry body.
Knock! Knock!
The light tapping on the door alerted Shiva. He was disoriented for a moment. Still
breathing hard! His shoulder was twitching. The familiar pain was missing. He looked
down at his knee. It didn’t hurt anymore. The scar had vanished. Still gasping for breath!
He looked down at his toe. Whole and complete now. He bent to check it. A cracking
sound reverberated through the room as his toe made its first movement in years. Still
breathing hard! There was also an unfamiliar tingling coldness in his neck. Very cold.
Knock! Knock! A little more insistent now.
A bewildered Shiva staggered to his feet, pulled the angvastram around his neck for
warmth and opened the door.
The darkness veiled his face, but Shiva could still recognise Bhadra. He whispered in a
panic stricken voice, ‘Shiva, I’m sorry to disturb you so late. But my mother has
suddenly got a very high fever. What should I do?’

 Shiva instinctively touched Bhadra’s forehead. ‘You too have a fever Bhadra. Go to your
room. I will get the doctor.’
As Shiva raced down the corridor towards the steps he encountered many more doors
opening with the now familiar message. ‘Sudden fever! Help!’
Shiva sprinted down the steps to the attached building where the doctors were housed.
He knocked hard on the door. Ayurvati opened it immediately, as if she was expecting
him. Shiva spoke calmly. ‘Ayurvati, almost my entire tribe has suddenly fallen ill. Please
come fast, they need help.’
Ayurvati touched Shiva’s forehead. You don’t have a fever?’
Shiva shook his head. ‘No.’
Ayurvati frowned, clearly surprised. She turned and ordered her nurses, ‘Come on. It’s
begun. Let’s go.’
As Ayurvati and her nurses rushed into the building, Chitraangadh appeared out of
nowhere. He asked Shiva, ‘What happened?’
‘I don’t know. Practically everybody in my tribe suddenly fell ill.’
‘You too are sweating heavily’
‘Don’t worry. I don’t have a fever. Look, I’m going back into the building. I want to see
how my people are doing’
Chitraangadh nodded, adding, ‘I’ll call Nandi.’
As Chitraangadh sped away in search of Nandi, Shiva ran into the building. He was
surprised the moment he entered. All the torches in the building had been lit. The
nurses were going from room to room, methodically administering medicines and
advising the scared patients on what they should do. A scribe walked along with each
nurse meticulously noting the details of each patient on a palm-leaf booklet. The
Meluhans were clearly prepared for such an eventuality. Ayurvati stood at the end of the
corridor, her hands on her hips. Like a general supervising her superbly trained and
efficient troops. Shiva rushed up to her and asked, ‘What about the second and third
floor?’
Ayurvati answered without turning to him. ‘Nurses have already reached all over the
building. I will go up to supervise once the situation on this floor has stabilised. We’ll
cover all the patients in the next half hour.’
‘You people are incredibly efficient but I pray that everyone will be okay,’ said a worried
Shiva.
Ayurvati turned to look at Shiva. Her eyebrows were raised slightly and a hint of a smile
hovered on her serious face. ‘Don’t worry. We’re Meluhans. We are capable of handling
any situation. Everybody will be fine.’
‘Is there anything I can do to help?’
‘Yes. Please go take a bath.’
‘What?!’
‘Please go take a bath. Right now,’ said Ayurvati as she turned back to look at her team.
‘Everybody, please remember that all children below the age of fifteen must
be
tonsured. Mastrak, please go up and start the secondary medicines. I’ll be there in five
minutes.’
‘Yes, my lady,’ said a young man as he hurried up the steps carrying a large cloth bag.
‘You’re still here?’ asked Ayurvati as she noticed that Shiva hadn’t left.
Shiva spoke softly, controlling his rising anger, ‘What difference will my bathing make?
My people are in trouble. I want to help.’
‘I don’t have the time or the patience to argue with you. You will go take a bath right
now!’ said Ayurvati, clearly not trying to control her rising temper.
Shiva glared at Ayurvati as he made a heroic effort to rein in the curses that wanted to
leap out of his mouth. His clenched fists wanted to have an argument of their own with
Ayurvati. But she was a woman.

 Ayurvati too glared back at Shiva. She was used to being obeyed. She was a doctor. If
she told a patient to do something, she expected it to be done without question. But in
her long years of experience she had also seen a few patients like Shiva, especially
from the nobility. Such patients had to be reasoned
with. Not instructed . Yet, this was
a simple immigrant. Not some nobleman!
Controlling herself with great effort, Ayurvati said, ‘Shiva, you are sweating. If you don’t
wash it off, it will kill you. Please trust me. You cannot be of any help to your tribe if you
are dead.’

 
Chitraangadh banged loudly on the door. A bleary eyed Nandi woke up cursing. He
wrenched the door open and growled, ‘This better be important!’
‘Come quickly. Shiva’s tribe has fallen ill.’
‘Already? But this is only the first night!’ exclaimed Nandi. Picking up his angvastram he
said, ‘Let’s go!’
The bathroom seemed a strange place for a bath. Shiva was used to splashing about in
the chilly Mansarovar Lake for his bi-monthly ablutions. The bathroom felt strangely
constricted. He turned the magical device on the wall to increase the flow of water. He
used the strange cake-like substance that the Meluhans said was a soap to rub the
body clean. Ayurvati had been very clear. The soap had to be used. He turned the
water off and picked up the towel. As he rubbed himself vigorously, the mystifying
development he had ignored in the past few hours came flooding back. His shoulder felt
better than new He looked down in awe at his knee. No pain, no scar. He stared in
wonder at his completely healed toe. And then he realised that it wasn’t just the injured
parts, but his entire body felt new, rejuvenated and stronger than ever. His neck,
though, still felt intolerably cold.
What the devil is going on?
He stepped out of the bathroom and quickly wore a new dhoti. Again, Ayurvati’s strict
instructions were not to wear his old clothes which were stained by his sweat. As he
was putting on the angvastram around his neck for some warmth, there was a knock on
the door. It was Ayurvati. ‘Shiva, can you open the door please? I just want to check
whether you are all right.’
Shiva opened the door. Ayurvati stepped in and checked Shiva’s temperature; it was
normal. Ayurvati nodded slightly and said, ‘You seem to be healthy. And your tribe is
recovering quickly as well. The trouble has passed.’
Shiva smiled gratefully. ‘Thanks to the skills and efficiency of your team. I am truly sorry
for arguing with you earlier. It was unnecessary. I know you meant well.’
Ayurvati looked up from her palm-leaf booklet with a slight smile and a raised eyebrow.
‘Being polite, are we?’
‘I’m not that rude, you know,’ grinned Shiva. ‘You people are just too supercilious!’
Ayurvati suddenly stopped listening as she stared at Shiva with a stunned look on her
face. How had she not noticed it before? She had never believed in the legend. Was
she going to be the first one to see it come true? Pointing weakly with her hands she
mumbled, ‘Why have you covered your neck?’
‘It’s very cold for some reason. Is it something to get worried about?’ asked Shiva as he
pulled the angvastram off.
A cry resounded loudly through the silent room as Ayurvati staggered back. Her hand
covered her mouth in shock while the palm leaves scattered on the floor. Her knees
were too weak to hold her up. She collapsed with her back against the wall, never once
taking her eyes off Shiva. Tears broke through her proud eyes. She kept repeating, ‘Om
Brahmaye namah. Om Brahmaye namah.’

 ‘What happened? Is it serious?’ asked a worried Shiva.
You have come! My Lord, you have come!’
Before a bewildered Shiva could react to her strange reaction, Nandi rushed in and
noticed Ayurvati on the ground. Copious tears were flowing down her face.
‘What happened, my lady?’ asked a startled Nandi.
Ayurvati just pointed at Shiva’s neck. Nandi looked up. The neck shone an eerie
iridescent blue. With a cry that sounded like that of a long caged animal just released
from captivity, Nandi collapsed on his knees. ‘My Lord! You have come! The Neelkanth
has come!’
The Captain bent low and brought his head down to touch the Neelkanth’s feet
reverentially. The object of his adoration however, stepped back, befuddled and
perturbed.
‘What the hell is going on here?’ Shiva asked agitatedly.
Holding a hand to his freezing neck, he turned around to the polished copper plate and
stared in stunned astonishment at the reflection of his neel kanth ; his blue throat .
Chitraangadh, holding the door frame for support, sobbed like a child. ‘We’re saved!
We’re saved! He has come!’

  
CHAPTER 2
Land of Pure Life
 
Chenardhwaj, the governor of Kashmir, wanted to broadcast to the entire world that the
Neelkanth had appeared in his capital city. Not in the other frontier towns like
Takshashila, Karachapa or Lothal. His Srinagar! But the bird courier had arrived almost
immediately from the Meluhan capital Devagiri , the abode of the gods . The orders
were crystal clear. The news of the arrival of the Neelkanth had to be kept secret until
the emperor himself had seen Shiva. Chenardhwaj was ordered to send Shiva along
with an escort to Devagiri. Most importantly, Shiva himself was not to be told about the
legend. ‘The emperor will advise the supposed Neelkanth in an appropriate manner,’
were the exact words in the message.
Chenardhwaj had the privilege of informing Shiva about the journey. Shiva though, was
not in the most amenable of moods. He was utterly perplexed by the sudden devotion of
every Meluhan around him. Since he had been transferred to the gubernatorial
residence where he lived in luxury, only the most important citizens of Srinagar had
access to him.
‘My Lord, we will be escorting you to Devagiri, our capital. It is a few weeks’ journey
from here,’ said Chenardhwaj as he struggled to bend his enormous and muscular
frame lower than he ever had.
I’m not going till somebody tells me what is going on! What the hell is this damned
legend of the Neelkanth?’ Shiva asked angrily.
‘My Lord, please have faith in us. You will know the truth soon. The emperor himself will
tell you when you reach Devagiri.’
‘And what about my tribe?’
‘They will be given lands right here in Kashmir, my Lord. All the resources that they
need to lead a comfortable life will be provided for.’
‘Are they being held hostage?’
‘Oh no, my Lord,’ said a visibly disturbed Chenardhwaj. ‘They are your tribe, my Lord.
If I had my way, they would live like nobility for the rest of their lives. But the laws cannot
be broken, my Lord. Not even for you. We can only give them what had been promised.
In the course of time my Lord, you can decide to change the laws you feel necessary.
Then we could certainly accommodate them anywhere.’
‘Please, my Lord,’ pleaded Nandi. ‘Have faith in us. You cannot imagine how important
you are to Meluha. We have been waiting for a very long time for you. We need your
help.’
Please help me! Please!
The memory of another desperate plea from a distraught woman years ago returned to
haunt Shiva as he was stunned into silence.

 
‘Your destiny is much larger than these massive mountains.’
Nonsense! I don’t deserve any destiny. If these people knew my guilt, they would stop
this bullshit instantly!
‘I don’t know what to do, Bhadra.’
Shiva was sitting in the royal gardens on the banks of the Dal Lake while his friend sat

 at his side, carefully filling some marijuana into a chillum. As Bhadra used the lit stick to
bring the chillum to life, Shiva said impatiently, ‘That’s a cue for you to speak, you fool.’
‘No. That’s actually a cue for me to hand you the chillum, Shiva.’
‘Why will you not council me?’ asked Shiva in anguish. ‘We are still the same friends
who never made a move without consulting each other!’
Bhadra smiled. ‘No we are not. You are the Chief now. The tribe lives and dies by your
decisions. It cannot be corrupted by any other person’s influence. We are not like the
Pakratis, where the Chief has to listen to whoever is the loudmouth on their council.
Only the chief’s wisdom is supreme amongst the Gunas. That is our tradition.’
Shiva raised his eyes in exasperation. ‘Some traditions are meant to be broken!’
Bhadra stayed silent. Stretching his hand, Shiva grabbed the chillum from Bhadra. He
took one deep puff, letting the marijuana spread its munificence into his body.
‘I’ve heard just one line about the legend of the Neelkanth,’ said Bhadra. ‘Apparently
Meluha is in deep trouble and only the Neelkanth can save them.’
‘But I can’t seem to see any trouble out here? Everything seems perfect. If they want to
see real trouble we should take them to our land!’
Bhadra laughed slightiy. ‘But what is it about the blue throat that makes them believe
you can save them?’
‘Damned if I know! They are so much more advanced than us. And yet they worship me
like I am some god. Just because of this blessed blue throat’
‘I think their medicines are magical though. Have you noticed that the hump on my back
has reduced a litde bit?’
‘Yes it has! Their doctors are seriously gifted.’
‘You know their doctors are called Brahmins?’
‘Like Ayurvati?’ asked Shiva, passing the chillum back to Bhadra.
‘Yes. But the Brahmins don’t just cure people. They are also teachers, lawyers, priests,
basically any intellectual profession.’
‘Talented people,’ sniffed Shiva.
‘That’s not all,’ said Bhadra, in between a long inhalation.
‘They have a concept of specialisation. So in addition to the Brahmins, they have a
group called Kshatriyas, who are the warriors and rulers. Even the women can be
Kshatriyas!’
‘Really? They allow women into their army?’
‘Well, apparently there aren’t too many female Kshatriyas. But yes, they are allowed into
the army.’
‘No wonder they are in trouble!’
The friends laughed loudly at the strange ways of the Meluhans. Bhadra took another
puff from the chillum before continuing his story. ‘And then they have Vaishyas, who are
craftsmen, traders and business people and finally the Shudras who are the farmers
and workers. And one caste cannot do another caste’s job.’
‘Hang on,’ said Shiva. ‘That means that since you are a warrior, you would not be
allowed to trade at the marketplace?’
‘Yes.’
‘Bloody stupid! How would you get me my marijuana? After all that is the only thing you
are useful for!’
Shiva leaned back to avoid the playful blow from Bhadra. ‘All right, all right. Take it
easy!’ he laughed. Stretching out, he grabbed the chillum from Bhadra and took another
deep drag.
We’re talking about everything except what we should be talking about.
Shiva became serious again. ‘But seriously, strange as they are, what should I do?’
‘What are you thinking of doing?’
Shiva looked away, as if contemplating the roses in the far corner of the garden. ‘I don’t

 want to run away once again.’
‘What?’ asked Bhadra, not hearing Shiva’s tormented whisper clearly.
‘I said,’ repeated Shiva loudly, ‘I can’t bear the guilt of running away once again.’
‘That wasn’t your fault...’
‘YES IT WAS!’
Bhadra fell silent. There was nothing that could be said. Covering his eyes, Shiva
sighed once again. ‘Yes, it was...’
Bhadra put his hand on his friend’s shoulder, pressing it gently, letting the terrible
moment pass. Shiva turned his face. ‘I’m asking for advice, my friend. What should I
do? If they need my help, I can’t turn away from them. At the same time, how can I
leave our tribe all by themselves out here? What should I do?’
Bhadra continued to hold Shiva’s shoulder. He breathed deeply. He could think of an
answer. It may have been the correct answer for Shiva, his friend . But was it the correct
answer for Shiva, the leader !
‘You have to find that wisdom yourself, Shiva. That is the tradition.’
‘O the hell with you!’
Shiva threw the chillum back at Bhadra and stormed away.

 
In was only a few days later that a minor caravan consisting of Shiva, Nandi and three
soldiers was scheduled to leave Srinagar. The small party would ensure that they
moved quickly through the realm and reached Devagiri as soon as possible. Governor
Chenardhwaj was anxious for Shiva to be recognised quickly by the empire as the true
Neelkanth. He wanted to go down in history as the governor who found the Lord.
Shiva had been made ‘presentable’ for the emperor. His hair had been oiled and
smoothened. Lines of expensive clothes, attractive ear-rings, necklaces and other
jewellery were brought to adorn his muscular frame. His fair face had been scrubbed
clean with special Ayurvedic
herbs to remove years of dead skin & decay. A cravat
had been fabricated out of cotton to cover his glowing blue throat. Beads had been
cleverly darned on to the cravat to make it look like the traditional necklaces that
Meluhan men wore while on religious exercises. The cravat felt warm on his still cold
throat.
‘I will be back soon,’ said Shiva as he hugged Bhadra’s mother. He was amazed that
the old lady’s limp was a little less noticeable.
Their medicines
are truly magical .
As a morose Bhadra looked at him, Shiva whispered, ‘Take care of the tribe. You are in
charge till I come back.’
Bhadra stepped back, starded. ‘Shiva you don’t have to that just because I am your
friend.’
‘I have to do it, you fool. And the reason I have to do i that you are more capable than
me.’
Bhadra stepped up and embraced Shiva, lest his frie notice the tears in his eyes. ‘No
Shiva, I am not. Not even my dreams.’
‘Shut up! Listen to me carefully,’ said Shiva as Bhai smiled sadly. ‘I don’t think the
Gunas are at any risk out here. At least not as much as we were at Mount Kailash. But
e\ then, if you feel you need help, ask Ayurvati. I saw her wl the tribe was ill. She
showed tremendous commitment save us all. She is worth trusting.’
Bhadra nodded, hugged Shiva again and left the room.

  
Ayurvati knocked politely on the door. ‘May I come in, my Lord?’
This was the first time she had come into his presence since that fateful moment seven
days back. It seemed like a lifetime to her. Though she appeared to be her confident
self again, there was a slightiy different look about her. She had the appearance of
someone who had been touched by the divine.
‘Come in Ayurvati. And please, none of this “Lord” business. I am still the same uncouth
immigrant you met a few days ago.’
‘I am sorry about that comment, my Lord. It was wrong of me to say that and I am willing
to accept any punishment that you may deem fit.’
‘What’s wrong with you? Why should I punish you for speaking the truth? Why should
this bloody blue throat change anything?’
‘You will discover the reason, my Lord,’ whispered Ayurvati with her head bowed. We
have waited for centuries for you.’
‘Centuries?! In the name of the holy lake, why? What can I do that any of you smart
people can’t?’
‘The emperor will tell you, my Lord. Suffice it to say that from all that I have heard from
your tribe, if there is one person worthy of being the Neelkanth, it is you.’
‘Speaking of my tribe, I have told them that if they need any help, they can request you.
I hope that is all right.’
‘It would be my honour to provide any assistance to them, my Lord.’
Saying this, she bent down to touch Shiva’s feet in the traditional Indian form of showing
respect. Shiva had resigned himself to accepting this gesture from most Meluhans but
immediately stepped back as Ayurvati bent down.
‘What the hell are you doing, Ayurvati?’ asked a horrified Shiva. You are a doctor, a
giver of life. Don’t embarrass me by touching my feet.’
Ayurvati looked up at Shiva, her eyes shining with admiration and devotion. This was
certainly a man worthy of being the Neelkanth.

 
Nandi entered Shiva’s room carrying a saffron cloth with the word ‘Ram’ stamped
across every inch of it. He requested Shiva to wrap it around his shoulders. As Shiva
complied, Nandi muttered a quick short prayer for a safe journey to Devagiri.
‘Our horses wait outside, my Lord. We can leave when you are ready,’ said Nandi.
‘Nandi,’ said an exasperated Shiva. ‘How many times must I tell you? My name is
Shiva. I am your friend, not your Lord’
‘Oh no, my Lord,’ gasped Nandi. ‘You are the Neelkanth. You are the Lord. How can I
take your name?’
Shiva rolled his eyes, shook his head slightiy and turned towards the door. ‘I give up!
Can we leave now?’
‘Of course, my Lord.’
They stepped outside to see three mounted soldiers waiting patiently, while tethered
close to them were three more horses. One each for Shiva and Nandi, while the third
was assigned for carrying their provisions. The well-organised Meluhan Empire had rest
houses and provision stores spread across all major travel routes. As long as there
were enough provisions for just one day, a traveller carrying Meluhan coins could
comfortably keep buying fresh provisions to last a journey of months.
Nandi’s horse had been tethered next to a small platform. The platform had steps
leading up to it from the other side. Clearly, this was convenient infrastructure for obese
riders who found it a little cumbersome to climb onto a horse. Shiva looked at Nandi’s

 enormous form, then at his unfortunate horse and then back at Nandi.
‘Aren’t there any laws in Meluha against cruelty to animals?’ asked Shiva with the most
sincere of expressions.
‘Oh yes, my Lord. Very strict laws. In Meluha ALL life is precious. In fact there are strict
guidelines as to when and how animals can be slaughtered and...’
Suddenly Nandi stopped speaking. Shiva’s joke had finally breached Nandi’s slow wit.
They both burst out laughing as Shiva slapped Nandi hard on his back.

 
Shiva’s entourage followed the course of the Jhelum which had resumed its thunderous
roar as it crashed down the lower Himalayas. Once on the magnificent flat plains, the
turbulent river calmed down once again and flowed smoothly on. Smooth enough for the
group to get on one of the many public transport barges to sail quickly down to the town
of Brihateshpuram.
From there on, they went east by a well laid and marked road through Punjab, the heart
of the empire’s northern reaches. Punjab literally meant the land of the five rivers . The
land of the Indus, Jhelum, Chenab, Ravi and Beas. The four eastern rivers aspired to
grasp the grand Indus, which flowed farthest to the west. They succeeded
spectacularly, after convoluted journeys on the rich plains of Punjab. The Indus itself
found comfort and succour in the enormous, all embracing ocean. The mystery of the
ocean’s final destination though was yet to be unravelled.
‘What is Ram?’ enquired Shiva as he looked down at the word covering every inch of
his saffron cloth.
The three accompanying soldiers rode at a polite distance behind Shiva and Nandi. Far
enough not to overhear any conversation but close enough to move in quickly at the first
sign of trouble. It was a part of their standard Meluhan service rules.
‘Lord Ram was the emperor who established our way of life, my Lord,’ replied Nandi.
‘He lived around one thousand two hundred years ago. He created our systems, our
rules, our ideologies, everything. His reign is known simply as ‘Ram Rajya’ or ‘the rule
of Ram . The term ‘Ram Rajya’ is considered to be the gold standard of how an empire
must be administered, to create a perfect life for all its citizens. Meluha is still run
according to his principles. Jai Shri Ram.’
‘He must have been quite a man! For he truly created a paradise right here on earth.’
Shiva did not lie when he said this. He truly believed that if there was a paradise
somewhere, it couldn’t have been very different from Meluha. This was a land of
abundance, of almost ethereal perfection! It was an empire ruled by clearly codified and
just laws, to which every Meluhan was subordinated, including the emperor. The
country supported a population of nearly eight million, which without exception seemed
well fed, healthy and wealthy. The average intellect was exceptionally high. They were a
slightiy serious people, but unfailingly polite and civil. It seemed to be a flawless society
where everyone knew his role and played it perfectly. They were conscious, nay
obsessive, about their duties. The simple truth hit Shiva: if the entire society was
conscious of its duties, nobody would need to fight for their individual rights. Since
everybody’s
rights
would be automatically taken care of through someone
else’s
duties . Lord Ram was a genius!
Shiva too repeated Nandi’s cry, signifying Glory to Lord Ram. ‘Jai Shri Ram.’

 
Having left their horses at the government authorised crossing-house,

they crossed the

 river Ravi, close to Hariyupa , or the City of Hari . Shiva lingered there admiring
Hariyupa at a slight distance, while his soldiers waited just beyond his shadow, having
mounted their freshly allocated horses from the crossing-house on the other side of the
Ravi. Hariyupa was a much larger city than Srinagar and seemed grand from the
outside. Shiva thought seriously about exploring the magnificent city but that would
have meant a delay in the trip to Devagiri. Next to Hariyupa, Shiva saw a construction
project being executed. A new platform was being erected as Hariyupa had grown too
populous to accommodate everyone on its existing platform.
How the hell do they raise these magnificent platforms?
Shiva made a mental note to visit the construction site on his return journey. At a
distance, Jattaa, the captain of the river crossing house, was talking to Nandi while he
was about to climb the platform to mount his fresh horse.
‘Avoid the road via Jratakgiri,’ advised Jattaa. ‘There was a terrorist attack there last
night. All the Brahmins were killed and the village temple was destroyed. The terrorists
escaped as usual before any backup soldiers could arrive.’
‘When in Lord Agni’s name will we fight back? We should attack their country!’ snarled a
visibly angry Nandi.
‘I swear by Lord Indra, if I ever find one of these Chandravanshi terrorists, I will cut his
body into minute pieces and feed it to the dogs,’ growled Jattaa, clenching his fists tight.
‘Jattaa! We are followers of the Suryavanshis. We cannot even think of barbaric warfare
such as that!’ said Nandi.
‘Do the terrorists follow the rules of war when they attack us? Don’t they kill unarmed
men?’
‘That does not mean that we can act the same way, Captain. We are Meluhans!’ said
Nandi shaking his head.
Jattaa did not counter Nandi. He was distracted by Shiva still waiting at a distance. ‘Is
he with you?’ he asked.
‘Yes.’
‘He doesn’t wear a caste amulet. Is he a new immigrant?’
‘Yes.’ replied Nandi, getting uncomfortable answering questions about Shiva.
‘And you’re going to Devagiri?’ asked an increasingly suspicious Jattaa, looking harder
towards Shiva’s throat. ‘I’ve heard some rumours coming from Srinagar...’
Nandi interrupted Jattaa suddenly. ‘Thank you for your help, Captain Jattaa.’
Before Jattaa could act on his suspicions, Nandi quickly climbed the platform, mounted
his horse and rode towards Shiva. Reaching quickly, he said, ‘We should leave, my
Lord.’
Shiva wasn’t listening. He was perplexed once again as he saw the proud Captain
Jattaa on his knees. Jattaa was looking directly at Shiva with his hands folded in a
respectful namaste. He appeared to be mumbling something very quickly. Shiva
couldn’t be sure from that distance, but it seemed that the Captain was crying. He shook
his head and whispered, ‘Why?’
‘We should go, my Lord,’ repeated Nandi, a litde louder.
Shiva turned to him, nodded and kicked his horse into action.

 
Shiva looked to his left as he rode on the straight road, observing Nandi goading his
valiant horse along. He turned around and was not surprised to see his three bodyguard
soldiers riding at exactly the same distance as before. Not too close, and yet, not too
far. He glanced back at Nandi, suspicious that the jewellery Nandi wore was not merely
ornamental. He wore two amulets on his thick right arm. The first one had some
symbolic lines which Shiva could not fathom. The second one appeared to have an

 animal etching. Probably a bull. One of his gold chains had a pendant shaped like a
perfectly circular sun with rays streaming outwards. The other pendant was a brown,
elliptical seed-like object with small serrations all over it.
‘Can you tell me the significance of your jewellery or is that also a state secret?’ teased
Shiva.
‘Of course I can, my Lord,’ replied Nandi earnestly. He pointed at the first amulet that
had been tied around his massive arm with a silky gold thread. This is the amulet which
represents my caste. The lines drawn on it are a symbol of the shoulders of the
Parmatma, the almighty . This means that I am a Kshatriya.’
‘I am sure there are clearly codified guidelines for representing the other castes as well.’
‘Right you are, my Lord. You are exceptionally intelligent.’
‘No, I am not. You people are just exceptionally predictable.’
Nandi smiled as Shiva continued. ‘So what are they?’
‘What are what, my Lord?’
‘The symbols for the Brahmins, Vaishyas and Shudras.’
Well, if the lines are drawn to represent the head of the Parmatma, it would mean the
wearer is a Brahmin. The symbol for a Vaishya would be the lines forming a symbol of
the thighs of the Parmatma. And the feet of the Parmatma on the amulet would make
the wearer a Shudra.’
‘Interesting,’ said Shiva with a slight frown. ‘I imagine most Shudras are not too pleased
about their placement.’
Nandi was quite surprised at Shiva’s comments. He couldn’t understand why a Shudra
would have a problem with this long ordained symbol. But he kept quiet for fear of
disagreeing with his Lord.
‘And the other amulet?’ asked Shiva.
‘This second amulet depicts my chosen-tribe. Each chosen-tribe takes on jobs which fit
its profile. Every Meluhan, under the advice of their parents, applies for a chosen-tribe
when they turn twenty—five years old. Brahmins choose from birds, while Kshatriyas
apply for animals. Flowers are allocated to Vaishyas while Shudras must choose
amongst fishes. The Allocation Board allocates the chosen-tribe on the basis of a
rigorous examination process. You must qualify for a chosen-tribe that represents both
your ambitions and skills. Choose a tribe that is too mighty and you will embarrass
yourself throughout your life if your achievements don’t measure up to the standards of
that tribe. Choose a tribe too lowly and you will not be doing justice to your own talents.
My chosen-tribe is a bull. That is the animal that this amulet represents.’
‘And if I am not being rude, what does a bull mean in your rank of Kshatriya chosentribes?’
‘Well, it’s not as high as a lion, tiger or an elephant. But it’s not a rat or a pig either!’
‘Well, as far as I am concerned, the bull can beat any lion or elephant,’ smiled Shiva.
And what about the pendants on your chain?’
‘The brown seed is a representation of the last Mahadev, Lord Rudra. It symbolises the
protection and regeneration of life. Even divine weapons cannot destroy the life it
protects.’
‘And the Sun?’
‘My Lord, the sun represents the fact that I am a follower of the Suryavanshi
kings —
the kings who are the descendants
of the Sun’
‘What? The Sun came down and some queen...’ teased an incredulous Shiva.
‘Of course not, my Lord,’ laughed Nandi. ‘All it means is that we follow the solar
calendar. So you could say that we are the followers of the “path of the sun”. In practical
terms it denotes that we are strong and steadfast. We honour our word and keep our
promises even at the cost of our lives. We never break the law. We deal honourably
even with those who are dishonourable. Like the Sun, we never take from anyone but

 always give to others. We sear our duties into our consciousness so that we may never
forget them. Being a Suryavanshi means that we must always strive to be honest, brave
and above all, loyal to the truth.’
‘A tall order! I assume that Lord Ram was a Suryavanshi king?’
‘Yes, of course,’ replied Nandi, his chest puffed up with pride. ‘He was the Suryavanshi
king. Jai Shri Ram.’
‘Jai Shri Ram,’ repeated Shiva.

 
Nandi and Shiva crossed the river Beas on a boat. Their three soldiers waited to cross
on the following craft. The Beas was the last river to be crossed after which stretched
the straight road towards Devagiri. Unseasonal rain the previous night had made the
crossing-house
captain consider cancelling the day’s crossings across the river.
However the weather had been relatively calm since the morning, allowing the captain
to keep the service operational. Shiva and Nandi shared the boat with two other
passengers as well as the boatman who rowed them across. They had traded in their
existing horses at the crossing-house for fresh horses on the other side.
They were a short distance from the opposite bank when a sudden burst of torrential
rain came down from the heavens. The winds took on a sudden ferocity. The boatman
made a valiant effort to row quickly across, but the boat tossed violently as it
surrendered to the elements. Nandi stretched to tell Shiva to stay low for safety. But he
did not do it gently enough. His considerable weight caused the boat to list dangerously,
and he fell overboard.
The boatman tried to steady the boat with his rows to save the other passengers. Even
as he did so, he had the presence of mind to pull out his conch and blow an emergency
call to the crossing-house on the other side. The other two passengers should have
jumped overboard to save Nandi but his massive build made them hesitate. They knew
that if they tried to save him, they would most likely drown.
Shiva felt no such hesitation as he quickly tossed aside his angvastram, pulled off his
shoes and dived into the turbulent river. Shiva swam with powerful strokes and quickly
reached a rapidly drowning Nandi. He had to use all of his considerable strength to pull
Nandi to the surface. In spite of being buoyed by the water, Nandi weighed significantiy
more than what any normal man would. It was fortunate that Shiva felt stronger than
ever since the first night at the Srinagar immigration camp. Shiva positioned himself
behind Nandi and wrapped one arm around his chest. He used his other arm to swim to
the bank. Nandi’s weight made it very exhausting work, but Shiva was able to tow the
Meluhan captain to the shore soon as the emergency staff from the crossing-house
came rapidly towards them.
Shiva helped them drag Nandi’s limp body on to the land. He was unconscious.
The emergency staff then began a strange procedure. One of them started pressing
Nandi’s chest in a quick rhythmic motion to the count of five. The moment he would
stop, another emergency staff would cover Nandi’s lips with his own and breathe hard
into his mouth. Then they would repeat the procedure all over again. Shiva did not
understand what was going on but trusted both the knowledge as well as the
commitment of the Meluhan medical personnel.
After several anxious moments, Nandi suddenly coughed up a considerable amount of
water and woke up with a start. At first he was disoriented but he quickly regained his
wits and turned abruptly towards Shiva, screeching, ‘My Lord, why did you jump in after
me? Your life is too precious. You must never risk it for me!’
A surprised Shiva supported Nandi’s back and whispered calmly, ‘You need to relax, my
friend.’

 Agreeing with Shiva, the medical staff quickly placed Nandi on a stretcher to carry him
into the rest house that was attached to the crossing-house. The other boat passengers
were looking at Shiva with increasing curiosity. They knew that the fat man was a
relatively senior Suryavanshi soldier, judging by his amulets. Yet he called this fair,
caste-unmarked man ‘his Lord’. Strange. But all that mattered was that the soldier was
safe. They dispersed as Shiva followed the medical staff into the rest house.

  
CHAPTER 3
She Enters His Life
 
Nandi lay in a semi-conscious state for several hours as the medicines administered by
the doctors worked on his body. Shiva sat by his side, repeatedly changing the wet cloth
on his burning forehead to control the fever. Nandi kept babbling incoherently as he
tossed and turned in his sleep, making Shiva’s task that much more difficult.
‘I’ve been searching... long... so long... a hundred years... never thought I.... find
Neelkanth... Jai Shri Ram...’
Shiva tried to ignore Nandi’s babble as he focussed on keeping the fever down. But his
ears had caught on to something.
He’s been searching for a hundred years?!
Shiva frowned.
The fever’s affecting his bloody brain! He doesn’t look a day older than twenty years!
‘I’ve been searching for a hundred years...,’ continued the oblivious Nandi. ‘...I found...
Neelkanth...’
Shiva stopped for a moment and stared hard at Nandi. Then shaking his head
dismissively, he continued his ministrations.

 
Shiva had been walking on a paved, signposted road along the River Beas for the better
part of an hour. He had left the rest house to explore the area by himself, much against
a rapidly recovering Nandi’s advice. Nandi was out of danger, but they had to wait for a
few days nevertheless, so that the Captain could be strong enough to travel. There was
not much Shiva could do at the rest house and he had begun to feel resdess. The three
soldiers had tried to shadow Shiva, but he had angrily dismissed them. ‘Will you please
stop trying to stick to me like leeches?’
The rhythmic hymns sung by the gentle waters of the Beas soothed Shiva. A cool
tender breeze teased his thick lock of hair. He rested his hand on the hilt of his
scabbard as his mind swirled with persistent questions.
Is Nandi really more than a hundred years old? But that’s impossible! And what the hell
do these craqy Meluhans need me for anyway? And why in the name of the holy lake is
my bloody throat still feeling so cold?
Lost in his thoughts, Shiva did not realise that he had strayed off the road into a
clearing. Staring him in the face was the most beautiful building he had ever seen. It
was built entirely with white and pink marble. An imposing flight of stairs led up to the
top of a high platform, which had been adorned by pillars around its entire
circumference. The ornate roof was topped by a giant triangular spire, like a giant
‘namaste’ to the gods. Elaborate sculptures were carved upon every available space on
the structure.
Shiva had spent many days in Meluha and all the buildings he had seen so far were
functional and efficient. However, this particular one was oddly flamboyant. At the
entrance, a signpost announced, Temple of Lord Brahma’. The Meluhans appeared to
reserve their creativity for religious places.
There was a small crowd of hawkers around the courtyard in the clearing. Some were
selling flowers, others were selling food. Still others were selling assorted items required

 for a puja . There was a stall where worshippers could leave their footwear as they went
up to the temple. Shiva left his shoes there and walked up the steps. Entering the main
temple, he stared at the designs and sculptures, mesmerized by the sheer magnificence
of the architecture.
‘What are you doing here?’
Shiva turned around to find a Pandit staring at him quizzically. His wizened face sported
a flowing white beard matched in length only by his silvery mane. Wearing a saffron
dhoti and angvastram, he had the calm, gende look of a man who had already attained
nirvana , but had chosen to remain on earth to fulfil some heavenly duties. Shiva
realised that the Pandit was the first truly old person that he had seen in Meluha.
‘I am sorry. Am I not allowed in here?’ asked Shiva politely.
‘Of course you are allowed in here. Everyone is allowed into the house of the gods.’
Shiva smiled. Before he could respond however, the Pandit questioned once again, ‘But
you don’t believe in these gods, do you?’
Shiva’s smile disappeared as quickly as it came.
How the hell does he know?
The Pandit answered the question in Shiva’s eyes. ‘Everyone who enters this place of
worship looks only at the idol of Lord Brahma. Almost nobody notices the efforts and the
brilliance of the architects who built this lovely temple. You, however, have eyes only for
the work of the architects. You have not yet cast even a glance upon the idol.’
Shiva grinned apologetically. You guessed right. I don’t believe in symbolic gods. I
believe that the real god exists all around us. In the flow of the river, in the rustle of the
trees, in the whisper of the winds. He speaks to us all the time. All we need to do is
listen. However, I apologise if I have caused some offence in not showing proper
respect for your god.’
You don’t need to apologise, my friend,’ smiled the Pandit. There is no “your god” or
“;my god”. All godliness comes from the same source. Just the manifestations are
different. But I have a feeling that one day you will find a temple worth walking into just
for prayer, not to admire its beauty.’
‘Really? Which temple might that be?’
‘You will find it when you are ready, my friend.’
Why do these Meluhans always talk in bizarre riddles?
Shiva nodded politely, his expression pretending an appreciation for the Pandit’s words
that he did not truly feel. He thought it wise to flee the temple before his welcome was
stretched any further.
‘It’s time to get back to my rest house now, Pandit ji. But I eagerly look forward to finding
the temple of my destiny. It was a pleasure meeting you,’ said Shiva, as he bent down
to touch the Pandit’s feet.
Placing his hand on Shiva’s head, the Pandit said gently, ‘Jai Guru Vishwamitra. Jai
Guru Vashishta.’
Shiva rose, turned and walked down the steps. Looking at Shiva walking away from
him, clearly out of earshot, the Pandit whispered with an admiring smile, for he had
recognised his fellow traveller in karma . ‘The pleasure was all mine, my karmasaathi’
Shiva reached the shoe stall, out on his shoes and offered a coin for the service. The
shoe-keeper politely declined. ‘Thank you Sir, but this is a service provided by the
government of Meluha. There is no charge for it.’

 
Shiva smiled. ‘Of course! You people have a system for everything. Thank you.’
The shoe-keeper smiled back. ‘We are only doing our duty, Sir.’
Shiva walked back to the temple steps. As he sat down, he breathed in deeply and let

 the tranquil atmosphere suffuse him with its serenity. And then it happened. The
moment that every unrealised heart craves for. The unforgettable instant that a soul,
clinging on to the purest memory of its previous life, longs for. The second, that in spite
of a conspiracy of the gods, only a few lucky men experience. The moment when she
enters his life.
She rode in on a chariot, guiding the horses expertly into the courtyard, while a lady
companion by her side held on to the railings. Although her black hair was tied in an
understated bun, a few irreverent strands danced a spellbinding kathak in the wind.
Her piercingly magnetic, blue eyes and bronzed skin were an invitation for jealousy from
the goddesses. Her body, though covered demurely in a long angvastram, still ignited
Shiva’s imagination enough to sense the lovely curves which lay beneath. Her flawless
face was a picture of concentration as she manoeuvred the chariot skilfully into its
parking place. She dismounted the chariot with an air of confidence. It was a calm
confidence which had not covered the ugly distance towards arrogance. Her walk was
dignified. Stately enough to let a beholder know that she was detached, but not cold.
Shiva stared at her like a parched piece of earth mesmerised by a passing rain cloud.
Have mercy on me!
‘My lady, I still feel it’s not wise to wander so far from the rest of your entourage,’ said
her companion.
She answered. ‘Krittika, just because others don’t know the law, doesn’t mean that we
can ignore it. Lord Ram clearly stated that once a year, a pious woman has to visit Lord
Brahma. I will not break that law, no matter how inconvenient it is to the bodyguards!’
The lady noticed Shiva staring at her as she passed by him. Her delicate eyebrows
arched into a surprised and annoyed frown. Shiva made a valiant attempt to tear his
glance away, but realised that his eyes were no longer in his control. She continued
walking up, followed by Krittika.
She turned around at the top of the temple steps, to see the caste unmarked immigrant
at a distance, still staring at her unabashedly. Before turning to walk into the main
temple, she muttered to Krittika, ‘These uncouth immigrants! As if we’ll find our saviour
amongst these barbarians!’
It was only when she was out of sight that Shiva could breathe again. As he desperately
tried to gather his wits, his overwhelmed and helpless mind took one obvious decision
— there was no way he was leaving the temple before getting another look at her. He
sat down on the steps once again. As his breathing and heartbeat returned to normal,
he finally began to notice the surroundings that had been consecrated by her recent
presence. He stared once again at the road on the left from where she had turned in.
She had ridden past the cucumber seller standing near the banyan tree.
Incidentally, why is the cucumber seller not trying to hawk his wares? He just seems to
be staring at the temple. Anyway, it is not any of my concern.
He followed the path that her chariot had taken as it had swerved to its left, around the
fountain at the centre of the courtyard. It had then taken a sharp right turn past the
shepherd standing at the entrance of the garden.
Incidentally, where were this shepherd’s sheep?
Shiva continued to look down the path the chariot had taken into the parking lot. Next to
the chariot stood another man who had just walked into the temple complex, but had
inexplicably not entered the temple itself. He turned to the shepherd and appeared to
nod slightly. Before Shiva could piece together the information that he had just seen, he
felt her presence again. He turned immediately to see her walking down the steps, with
Krittika walking silently behind. Still finding this rude, caste-unmarked, obviously foreign
man staring at her, she walked up to him and asked in a firm but polite voice, ‘Excuse
me, is there a problem?’
‘No. No. There’s no problem. I just felt that I had seen you before somewhere,’ replied a

 flustered Shiva.
The lady was not sure how to respond to this. It was obviously a lie but there appeared
to be a sincere voice behind it. Before she could react, Krittika cut in rudely. ‘Is that the
best line you could come up with?’
As Shiva was about to retort, he was alerted by a quick movement from the cucumber
seller. Shiva turned to see him pulling out a sword as he tossed his shawl aside. The
shepherd and the man next to the chariot also stood poised in traditional fighter
positions with their swords drawn. Shiva immediately drew his sword and stretched out
his left hand protectively, to pull the object of his fascination behind him. She however
deftly side-stepped his protective hand, reached into the folds of her angvastram and
drew out her own sword.
Shiva glanced at her, surprised, and flashed her a quick, admiring smile. Her eyes
flashed right back, acknowledging the unexpected yet providential partnership.
She whispered under her breath to Krittika, ‘Run back into the temple. Stay there till this
is over.’
Krittika protested. ‘But my lady...’
‘NOW!’ she ordered.
Krittika turned and ran up the temple steps. Shiva and the lady stood back to back in a
standard defensive-partner
position. They covered all the directions of any possible
attack. The three attackers charged in. Two more jumped in from behind the trees to
join the other three. Shiva raised his sword defensively as the shepherd came up close.
Feigning a sideward movement to draw the shepherd into an aggressive attack, Shiva
dropped his sword low. The shepherd should have been tempted to move in for a kill
wound and in response, Shiva would have quickly raised his sword and dug it deep into
the shepherd’s heart.
The shepherd, however, moved unexpectedly. Instead of taking advantage of Shiva’s
opening, he tried to strike Shiva’s shoulder. Shiva quickly raised his right arm and
swung viciously, inflicting a deep wound across the shepherd’s torso. As the shepherd
fell back, another attacker moved in from the right. He swung from a distance. Not too
smart a move, as it would merely have inflicted a surface nick. Shiva stepped back to
avoid the swing and brought his sword down in a smooth action to dig deep into the
attacker’s thigh. Screaming in agony, this attacker too fell back As another attacker
joined in the fight from the left, Shiva realised that this was indeed a very strange
assault.
The attackers seemed to know what they were doing. They seemed to be good
warriors. But they also seemed to be in a bizarre dance of avoidance. They did not
appear to want to kill. Merely injure. It was because they held themselves in check that
they were being beaten back very easily. Shiva parried off another attack from the left
and pushed his sword viciously into the man’s shoulder. The man screamed in pain as
Shiva pushed him off the blade with his left hand. Slowly, but surely, the attackers were
being worn out. They were suffering too many injuries to seriously carry on the assault
for long.
Suddenly a giant of a man ran in from behind the trees carrying swords in both hands.
The man was cloaked in a black hooded robe from head to toe while his face was
hidden by a black mask, shaped exactly like a human face. The only visible parts of his
body were his large impassive almond-shaped
eyes and strong fleshy hands. He
charged upon Shiva and the lady as he barked an order to his men. He was too large to
battle with agility. But he compensated for his slow pace with his unusually skilled arms.
Shiva registered from the corner of his eye that the other attackers were picking up the
injured and withdrawing. The hooded figure was fighting a brilliant rearguard action as
his men retreated.
Shiva realised that the man’s hood would impair his side vision. That was a weakness

 that could be exploited. Moving to the left, Shiva swung ferociously, hoping to peg him
back so that the lady could finish the job from the other side. But his opponent was up to
the challenge. As he stepped slightly back, he deflected Shiva’s swing with a deft move
of his right hand. Shiva noticed a leather band on the hooded figure’s right wrist. It had a
sharp symbol on it. Shiva swung his sword back but the hooded figure moved aside
effordessly to avoid the blow. He pushed back a brutal flanking attack from the lady with
his left hand. He was keeping just enough distance from Shiva and the lady to defend
himself while at the same time keeping them engaged in combat.
All of a sudden the hooded figure disengaged from the battle and stepped back. He
began to tread backwards as he continued to point both his swords ahead, one at Shiva
and the other at the lady. His men had all disappeared into the trees. As he reached a
safe distance, he turned and ran behind his men. Shiva considered chasing him but
almost immediately decided against it. He might just rush into an ambush.
Shiva turned to the lady warrior and inquired, ‘Are you alright?’
‘Yes I am,’ ‘she nodded before asking with a sombre expression. Are you injured?’
‘Nothing serious. I’ll survive!’ he grinned.
In the meantime, Krittika came running down the temple steps and asked breathlessly,
‘My lady. Are you alright?’
‘Yes I am,’ she answered. ‘Thanks to this foreigner here.’
Krittika turned to Shiva and said, ‘Thank you very much. You have helped a very
important woman.’
Shiva did not seem to be listening though. He continued to stare at Krittika’s mistress as
if he were possessed. Krittika struggled to conceal a smile.
The noble woman averted her eyes in embarrassment, but said politely, ‘I am sorry, but
I am quite sure that we have not met earlier.’
‘No it’s not that,’ said a smiling Shiva. ‘It’s just that in our society, women don’t fight. You
move your sword quite well for a woman.’
O hell! That came out all wrong.
‘Excuse me?’ she said, a slightly belligerent tone in her voice, clearly upset about the
for-a-woman
remark. You don’t fight too badly either for a barbarian.’
‘Not too badly?! I’m an exceptional sword fighter! Do you want to try me?’
O bloody hell! What am I saying? I’m not going to impress her like this!
Her expression resumed its detached, supercilious look once again. ‘I have no interest
in duelling with you, foreigner.’
‘No. No. Don’t get me wrong. I didn’t want to duel with you. I just wanted to tell you that I
am quite good at sword-fighting. I am good at other things as well. And it came out all
wrong. I rather like the fact that you fought for yourself. You are a very good
swordsman. I mean a swordswoman. In fact, you are quite a woman...,’ bumbled Shiva,
losing the filter of judgement, exactiy at the time when he needed it the most.
Krittika, with her head bowed, smiled at the increasingly appealing exchange.
Her mistress, on the other hand, wanted to chastise the foreigner for his highly
inappropriate words. But he had saved her life. She was bound by the Meluhan code of
conduct. ‘Thank you for your help, foreigner. I owe you my life and you will not find me
ungrateful. If you ever need my help, do call on me.’
‘Can I call on you even if I don’t need your help?’
Shit! What am I saying?!
She glared at the caste-unmarked foreigner who clearly did not know his place. With
superhuman effort, she controlled herself, nodded politely and said, ‘Namaste.’
With that, the aristocratic woman turned around to leave. Krittika continued to stare at
Shiva with admiring eyes.
However, on seeing her mistress leaving, she too turned hurriedly to follow.
‘At least tell me your name,’ said Shiva, walking to keep pace with her.

 She turned around, staring even more gravely at Shiva.
‘Look, how will I find you if I need your help?’ asked Shiva sincerely.
For a moment, she was out of words or a glare. The request seemed reasonable. She
turned towards Krittika and nodded.
‘You can find us at Devagiri,’ answered Krittika. ‘Ask anyone in the city for Lady Sati.’
‘Sati...,’ said Shiva, letting the ethereal name roll over his tongue. ‘My name is Shiva.’
‘Namaste, Shiva. And I promise you, I will honour my word if you ever need my help,’
said Sati as she turned and climbed into her chariot, followed by Krittika.
Expertly turning the chariot, Sati urged her horses into a smooth trot. Without a
backward look she sped away from the temple. Shiva kept staring at the disappearing
profile of the chariot. Once it was gone, he continued to stare at the dust with intense
jealousy. It had been fortunate enough to have touched her.
I think I’m going to like this country.
For the first time in the journey, Shiva actually looked forward to reaching the capital city
of the Meluhans. He smiled and started towards the rest house.
Have to get to Devagiri quickly.

  
CHAPTER 4
Abode of the Gods
 
‘What! Who attacked you?’ cried a concerned Nandi as he rushed towards Shiva to
check his wounds.
‘Relax Nandi,’ replied Shiva. ‘You are in worse shape than I am after your adventure in
the water. It’s just a few superficial cuts. Nothing serious. The doctors have already
dressed the wounds. I am alright.’
‘I am sorry, my Lord. It’s entirely my fault. I should never have left you alone. It will
never happen again. Please forgive me, my Lord.’
Pushing Nandi gently back on to the bed, Shiva said, ‘There’s nothing to forgive, my
friend. How can this be your fault? Please calm down. Getting overworked will not do
your health any good.’
Once Nandi had calmed down a bit, Shiva continued, ‘In any case, I don’t think they
were trying to kill us. It was very strange.’
‘Us?’
‘Yes, there were two women involved.’
‘But who could these attackers be?’ asked Nandi. Then a disturbing thought dawned on
Nandi. ‘Did the attackers wear a pendant with a crescent moon on it?’
Shiva frowned. ‘No. But there was this one strange man. The best swordsmen of them
all. He was covered from head to toe in a hooded robe, his face veiled by a mask, the
kind I’ve seen you people wear at that colour festival . What is it called?’
‘Holi , my Lord?’
‘Yes, the holi kind of mask. In any case, you could only see his eyes and his hands.
His only distinguishing feature was a leather bracelet with a strange symbol on it’
‘What symbol, my Lord?’
Picking up a palm-leaf booklet and the thin charcoal writing-stick from the side table,
Shiva drew the symbol.

 
Nandi frowned. ‘That is an ancient symbol that some people used for the word Aum. But
who would want to use this symbol now?’
‘Aum?’ asked Shiva.
‘My Lord, Aum is the holiest word in our religion. It is considered to be the primeval
sound of nature. The hymn of the universe. It was so holy that for many millennia, most
people would not insult it by putting it down in written form.’
‘Then how did this symbol come about?’
‘It was devised by Lord Bharat, a great ruler who had conquered practically all of India
many thousands of years ago. He was a rare
Chandravanshi
who was worth

 respecting and had even married a Suryavanshi
princess with the aim of ending our
perpetual war.’
‘Who are the Chandravanshis?
’ asked Shiva.
‘Think of them as the very antithesis of us, my Lord. They are the followers of the kings
who are the descendants
of the moon .’
‘And they follow the lunar calendar?’
‘Yes, my Lord. They are a crooked, untrustworthy and lazy people with no rules, morals
or honour. They are cowards and never attack like principled Kshatriyas. Even their
kings are corrupt and selfish. The Chandravanshis are a blot on humanity!’
‘But what does the Aum symbol have to do with this?’
‘Well, King Bharat came up with this symbol of unity between the Suryavanshis and the
Chandravanshis. The top half in white represented the Chandravanshis.

 
The bottom half in red represented

the Suryavanshis.

 
The part in orange
common path.

coming out of the meeting

of these two parts represented

the

 
The crescent moon to the right of the symbol was the existing Chandravanshi

symbol.

 
And the sun above it was the existing Suryavanshi

symbol.

 
To signify that this was a pact blessed by the gods, Lord Bharat got a mandate for the

 pronunciation of this symbol as the holy word Aum.’
‘And then what happened?’
‘As expected, the pact died with the good king. Once the influence of Lord Bharat was
gone, the Chandravanshis were up to their old ways and the war began once again.
The symbol was forgotten. And the word Aum reverted to its original form of a word
without a written representation.’
‘But the symbol on the bracelet of this hooded man was not coloured. It was all black.
And the parts of the symbol didn’t look like lines to me. They looked like a drawing of
three serpents.’

 
‘Naga!’ exclaimed a shocked Nandi, before mumbling a soft prayer and touching his
Rudra pendant for protection.
‘Now who the bloody hell are the Nagas?’ asked Shiva.
‘They are cursed people, my Lord,’ gasped Nandi. ‘They are born with hideous
deformities because of the sins of their previous births. Deformities like extra hands or
horribly misshapen faces. But they have tremendous strength and skills. The Naga
name alone strikes terror in any citizen’s heart. They are not even allowed to live in the
Sapt Sindhu.’
‘The Sapt Sindhu?’
‘Our land, my Lord, the land of the seven rivers. The land of the Indus, Saraswati,
Yamuna, Ganga, Sarayu, Brahmaputra and Narmada. This is where Lord Manu
mandated that all of us, Suryavanshis and Chandravanshis, live.’
Shiva nodded as Nandi continued. ‘The city of the Nagas exists to the south of the
Narmada, beyond the border of our lands. In fact, it is bad luck to even speak of them,
my Lord!’
‘But why would a Naga attack me? Or any Meluhan for that matter?’
Cursing under his breath, Nandi said, ‘Because of the Chandravanshis!
What levels
have these two-faced people sunk to? Using the demon Nagas in their attacks! In their
hatred for us, they don’t even realise how many sins they are inviting on their own
souls!’
Shiva frowned. During the attack, it hadn’t appeared that the Naga was being used by
the small platoon of soldiers. In fact, it looked to him like the Naga was the leader.

 
It took another week for them to reach Devagiri. The capital city of the Meluhans stood
on the west bank of the Saraswati, which emerged at the confluence of the Sudej and
Yamuna rivers. Sadly, the Saraswati’s flow was severely reduced compared to her once
mighty size. But even in her abbreviated state, she was still massive and awe-inspiring.
Unlike many of the tempestuous rivers of the Punjab, the Saraswati was achingly calm.
The river seemed to sense that her days were coming to an end. Yet, she did not fight
aggressively to thrust her way through and survive. Instead, she unselfishly gave her all
to those who came to seek her treasures.
The soaring Devagiri though, was in complete contrast to the mellow Saraswati. Like all
Meluhan cities, Devagiri too was built on giant platforms, an effective protection against
floods and a sturdy defence against enemies. However, where Devagiri was different
from other Meluhan cities was in its sheer size. The city sprawled over three giant

 platforms, each of them spreading over three hundred and fifty hectares, significantly
larger than other cities. The platforms were nearly eight metres high and were bastioned
with giant blocks of cut stone interspaced with baked bricks. Two of the platforms,
named Tamra and Rajat , literally, bronze
and silver , were for the common man,
whereas the platform named Svarna
or gold was the royal citadel. The platforms
were connected to each other by tall bridges, made of stones and baked bricks, which
rose above the flood plains below.
Along the periphery of each enormous platform were towering city walls, with giant
spikes facing outwards. There were turrets at regular intervals along the city walls from
where approaching enemies could be repelled. This spectacle was beyond anything
that Shiva had ever seen. In his mind, the construction of a city like this must truly be
man’s greatest achievement.
Shiva’s entourage rode up to the drawbridge across the field of spikes to the Tamra
platform. The drawbridge had been reinforced with metal bars at the bottom and had
roughened baked bricks laid out on top so that horses and chariots would not slip.
There was something about the bricks he had seen across the empire that had intrigued
Shiva. Turning to Nandi he asked, Are these bricks made as per some standard
process?’
‘Yes my Lord,’ replied a surprised Nandi. All the bricks in Meluha are made as per
specifications and guidelines given by the Chief Architect of the empire. But how did you
guess?’
‘They are all exactly the same dimension.’
Nandi beamed in pride at his empire’s efficiency and his Lord’s power of observation.
The platform rose at the end of the drawbridge, with a road spiralling up to the summit in
one gende turn, facilitating the passage of horses and chariots. In addition, there was a
broad flight of stairs leading straight up the incline for pedestrians. The city walls and
the platform extended steeply onto the sides around this slope, making it a valley of
death for any enemy foolish enough to attack the platform from this area.
The city gates were made of a metal that Shiva had never seen before. Nandi clarified
that they were made of iron, a new metal that had just been discovered. It was the
strongest of all the metals but very expensive. The ore required to make it was not
easily available. At the platform entry, on top of the city gates, was etched the symbol of
the Suryavanshis — a bright red circular sun with its rays blazing out in all directions.
Below it was the motto that they lived by ‘Satya. Dharma. Maan ’: Truth. Duty. Honour .
Seeing just this much of the city had left Shiva awestruck. However, the sight that he
witnessed at the top of the platform, within the city gates, was truly breathtaking both in
its efficiency and simplicity. The city was divided into a grid of square blocks by the
paved streets. There were footpaths on the side for pedestrians, lanes marked on the
street for traffic in different directions, and of course, there were covered drains running
through the centre. All the buildings were constructed as standard two storied block
structures made of baked bricks. On top were wooden extensions for increasing the
height of the building, if required. Nandi clarified to Shiva that the structure of the
buildings differed internally depending on their specific requirements. All windows and
doors were built strictly on the side walls of buildings, never facing the main road.
The blank walls that faced the main roads bore striking black line drawings depicting the
different legends of the Suryavanshis, while the background was painted in the sober
colours of grey, light blue, light green or white. The most common background colour
though, appeared to be blue. In the Meluhan mind, blue was the holiest colour of them
all. It was the colour of the sky. It was just above green, the colour of the earth, in the
colour spectrum. Meluhans, who liked to see some greater design in every act of
nature, thought it was marvellous that blue was above green in the colour spectrum just
as the sky was above the earth.

 The most recurring illustrations on the walls were about the great emperor, Lord Ram.
His victories over his enemies, his subjugation of the wicked Chandravanshis, incidents
that proved his statesmanship and wisdom, had been lovingly recreated. Lord Ram was
deeply revered, and many Meluhans had come to worship him like a god. They referred
to him as Vishnu , an ancient title for the greatest of the gods meaning protector of the
world &propagator
of good .
As Shiva learned from Nandi, the city was divided into many districts consisting of four
to eight blocks. Each district had its own markets, commercial and residential areas,
temples and entertainment centres. Manufacturing or any other polluting activity was
conducted in separate quarters away from the districts. The efficiency and smoothness
with which Devagiri functioned belied the fact that it was the most populous city in the
entire empire. The last census just two years back had pegged the population of the city
at two hundred thousand.
Nandi led Shiva and the three soldiers to one of the city’s numerous guest houses, built
for the many tourists that frequented Devagiri, for both business and leisure. Tying up
their horses in the designated area outside the guest house, the party walked in to
register themselves and check into their rooms. The guest house had a style similar to
the many that Shiva had seen throughout their journey. There was a central courtyard
with the building built around it. The rooms were comfortably furnished and spacious.
‘My Lord, it’s almost time for dinner,’ said Nandi. ‘I will speak with the housekeeper and
have some food arranged. We should eat early and get enough sleep since our
appointment with the Emperor has been fixed at the beginning of the second prahar
tomorrow’
‘Sounds like a good idea.’
‘Also, if it is all right with you, shall I dismiss the soldiers and send them back to
Srinagar?’
‘That also sounds like a good idea,’ said a smiling Shiva. Why Nandi, you are almost
like a fount of brilliant ideas!’
Nandi laughed along with Shiva, always happy to be the cause of a smile on his Lord’s
face. ‘I’ll just be back, my Lord.’
Shiva lay down on his bed and was quickly lost in the thoughts that really mattered to
him.
I’ll finish the meeting with the Emperor as soon as humanly possible, give him whatever
the bloody hell he wants and then scour the city for Sati.
Shiva had considered asking Nandi about the whereabouts of Sati but had eventually
decided against it. He was painfully aware that he had made a less than spectacular
impression on her at their first meeting. If she hadn’t made it easy for him to find her, it
only meant that she wasn’t terribly stirred by him. He didn’t want to compound the issue
by speaking casually about her to others.
He smiled as the memory of her face came flooding back to him. He replayed the
magical moments when he had seen her fighting. Not the most romantic of sights for
most men of his tribe. But for Shiva, it was divine. He sighed recalling her soft, delicate
body, which had suddenly developed brutal, killer qualities upon being attacked. The
curves that had so captivated him swung smoothly as she transferred her weight to
swing her sword. The sober tied hair had swayed sensuously with each move of the
sword arm. He breathed deeply.
What a woman!

 
It was early in the morning when Shiva and Nandi crossed the bridge between the
Tamra and Svarna platforms to reach the royal citadel. The bridge, another marvel of

 Meluhan engineering, was flanked on the sides by a thick wall. Holes had been drilled
on the walls, to shoot arrows or pour hot oil on enemies. The bridge was bisected by a
massive gate, a final protection just in case the other platform was lost to an enemy.
When they crossed over to the Svarna platform, Shiva was completely taken by
surprise, not by the grandeur of the royal area but by the lack of it. He was shocked by
the fact that there was no opulence. Despite ruling over such a massive and wealthy
empire, the nobility lived in a conspicuously simple manner. The structure of the royal
citadel was almost exacdy like the other platforms. There were no special concessions
for the aristocrats. The same block structures that dominated all of Meluha were to be
found in the royal citadel as well. The only magnificent structure was to the far right and
sported the sign ‘Great Public Bath’. The Bath also had a glorious temple to Lord Indra
to the left. The temple, built of wood, stood on a raised foundation of baked bricks, its
cupola plated with solid gold! It seemed that special architecture was reserved only for
structures built for the Gods or ones that were for the common good.
Probably just like how Lord Ram would have preferred.
The only concession to the emperor, however, was that his standard block structure
was larger than the others. Significantly larger.

 
Shiva and Nandi entered the royal private office to find Emperor Daksha sitting on a
simple throne at the far end of the modesdy furnished room, flanked by a man and a
woman.
Daksha, greeting Shiva with a formal namaste, said. ‘I hope your journey was
comfortable.’
He looked too young to be an emperor of such a large country. Though he was
marginally shorter than Shiva, the major difference between them was the musculature.
While the strapping Shiva was powerfully built, Daksha’s body showed that it had not
been strained by too much exercise. He wasn’t obese either. Just average. The same
could be said about his wheatish complexioned face. Average sized, dark eyes flanked
a straight nose. He wore his hair long like most Meluhan men and women. The head
bore a majestic crown with the sun symbol of the Suryavanshis manifested in the centre
through sparkling gem stones. An elegant dhoti, with an angvastram hung down the
right shoulder and a large amount of functional jewellery, including two amulets on his
right arm, complemented Daksha’s average appearance. His only distinguishing feature
was his smile — which spread its innocent conviction all the way to his eyes. Emperor
Daksha looked like a man who wore his royalty lightly.
‘Yes it was, your highness,’ replied Shiva. The infrastructure in your empire is wonderful.
You are an extraordinary emperor.’
‘Thank you. But I only deserve reflected credit. The work is done by my people,’
‘You are too modest, your Highness.’
Smiling politely, Daksha asked, ‘May I introduce my most important aides?’ Without
waiting for an answer, he pointed to the woman on his left, ‘This is my prime minister,
Kanakhala. She takes care of all administrative, revenue and protocol matters.’
Kanakhala did a formal namaste to Shiva. Her head was shaved except for a tuft of
smooth hair at the back which had been tied in a knot. She had a string called the janau
tied across from her left shoulder down to the right side of her torso. She looked young
like most Meluhans, but was a little overweight as was clearly evident from the excess
flesh she bore between the white blouse and dhoti. She had a dark and incredibly
smooth complexion and like all her countrymen, wore jewellery that was restrained and
conservative. Shiva noticed that the second amulet on Kanakhala’s arm showed a
pigeon. Not a very high chosen-tribe amongst the Brahmins. Shiva bent low and did a

 formal Namaste in reply.
Pointing to his right, Daksha said, ‘And this is my chief of the armed forces, General
Parvateshwar. He looks after the army, navy, special forces, police etc’
Parvateshwar looked like a man that Shiva would think twice about taking on in a battle.
He was taller than Shiva and had an immensely muscular physique that dominated the
space around him. His curly and long hair had been combed fastidiously and fell neady
from under his crown. His smooth, swarthy skin was marked by the proud signs of long
years in battle. His body was hairless, in a rare departure from the normally hirsute
Kshatriya men who took body hair to be a sign of machismo. Probably to make up for
this deficiency, Parvateshwar maintained a thick and long moustache which curled
upwards at the edges. His eyes reflected his uncompromisingly strong and righteous
character. The second amulet on his arm showed Parvateshwar as a tiger, a very high
chosen-tribe amongst the Kshatriyas. He nodded curdy at Shiva. No Namaste. No
elaborate bow of his proud head. Shiva, however, smiled warmly and greeted
Parvateshwar with a formal Namaste.
‘Please wait outside, Captain,’ advised Parvateshwar, looking at Nandi.
Before Nandi could respond, Shiva cut in. ‘My apologies. But is it alright if Nandi stays
here with me? He has been my constant companion since I left my homeland and has
become a dear and trusted friend.’
‘Of course he may,’ replied Daksha.
‘Your Highness, it is not appropriate for a Captain to be witness to this discussion,’ said
Parvateshwar. ‘In any case, his service rules clearly state that he can only escort a
guest into the emperor’s presence and not stay there while a matter of state is
discussed.’
‘Oh relax Parvateshwar. You take your service rules too seriously sometimes.’ Turning
to Shiva, Daksha continued, ‘If it is alright with you, may we see your neck now?’
Nandi slid behind Shiva to untie the cravat. Seeing the beads darned on the cravat to
convey the impression that the throat was covered for religious reasons, Daksha smiled
and whispered, ‘Good idea.’
As Nandi pulled Shiva’s cravat off, Daksha and Kanakhala came close to inspect
Shiva’s throat in greater detail. Parvateshwar did not step forward but strained his neck
slightly to get a better look. Daksha and Kanakhala seemed clearly stunned by what
they saw.
The emperor felt the throat and whispered in awe, ‘The colour comes from the inside. It
is not a dye. It is true and genuine.’
Daksha and Kanakhala glanced at each other, tears glistening in their astounded eyes.
Kanakhala folded her hands into a namaste and began mumbling a chant under her
breath. Daksha looked up at Shiva’s face, trying desperately to suppress the ecstasy
that coursed through his insides. With a controlled smile, the Emperor of Meluha said, 1
hope we have not done anything to cause you any discomfort since your arrival in
Meluha.’
Despite Daksha’s controlled reaction, Shiva could guess that both the emperor and his
prime minister were taken aback by his blue throat.
Just how important is this bloody blue throat for the Meluhans?
‘Umm, none at all your Highness,’ replied Shiva as he tied the cravat back around his
neck. ‘In fact, my tribe and I have been delighted by the hospitality that we have
received here.’
‘I’m glad for that,’ smiled Daksha, bowing his head politely. ‘You may want to rest a litde
bit and we could talk in more detail tomorrow. Would you like to shift your residence to
the royal citadel? It is rumoured that the quarters here are a litde more comfortable.’
‘That is a very kind offer, your Highness.’
Daksha turned to Nandi and asked, ‘Captain, what did you say your name was?’

 ‘My name is Nandi, your Highness.’
‘You too are welcome to stay here. Make sure that you take good care of our honoured
guest. Kanakhala, please make all the arrangements.’
‘Yes, your Highness.’
Kanakhala called in one of her aides, who escorted Shiva and Nandi out of the royal
office.
As Shiva exited the room, Daksha went down on his haunches with great ceremony and
touched his head to the ground on which Shiva had just stood. He mumbled a prayer
sofdy and stood up again to look at Kanakhala with tears in his eyes. Kanakhala’s eyes,
however, betrayed impatience and a touch of anger.
‘I didn’t understand, your Highness,’ glared Kanakhala. ‘The blue mark was genuine.
Why did you not tell him?’
‘What did you expect me to do?’ cried a surprised Daksha. ‘This is his second day in
Devagiri. You want me to just accost him and tell him that he is the Neelkanth, our
saviour? That he has been sent to solve all our problems?’
‘Well, if he has a blue throat, then he is the Neelkanth, isn’t he? And if he is the
Neelkanth, then he is our saviour. He has to accept his destiny.’
An exasperated Parvateshwar interjected. ‘I can’t believe that we are talking like this.
We are Meluhans! We are the Suryavanshis! We have created the greatest civilisation
ever known to man. And some barbarian with no education, no skills, no merit is going
to be our saviour? Just because he has a blue throat?’
‘That is what the legend says Parvateshwar,’ countered Kanakhala.
Daksha interrupted both his ministers. ‘Parvateshwar, I believe in the legend. My people
believe in the legend. The Neelkanth has chosen my reign to appear. He will transform
all of India to the ideals of Meluha — a land of truth, duty and honour. With his
leadership, we can end the Chandravanshi crisis once and for all. All the agonies they
inflict upon us will be over — from the terrorist attacks to the shortage of Somras to the
killing of the Saraswati.’
‘Then why delay telling him, your Highness?’ asked Kanakhala. ‘The more days we
waste, the weaker becomes the resolve of our people. You know there was another
terrorist attack just a few days back at a village not far from Hariyupa. As our reaction
becomes weak, our enemies become bolder, your Highness. We must tell the Lord
quickly and announce his arrival to our people. It will give us the strength to fight our
cruel enemies.’
‘I will tell him. But I am trying to be more farsighted than you. So far our empire has only
faced the morale-sapping
influence
of fraudulent
Neelkanths.
Imagine
the
consequences
if people found out that the true Neelkanth has come but refuses to
stand by us. First we must be sure that he is willing to accept his destiny. Only then will
we announce him to our people. And I think that the best way to convince him is to
share the whole truth with him. Once he sees the unfairness of the attacks we face, he
will fight with us to destroy evil. If that takes time, so be it. We have waited for centuries
for the Neelkanth. A few more weeks will not destroy us.’

  
CHAPTER 5
Tribe of Brahma
 
Shiva was walking in the verdant gardens of the royal guest house. His things were
being moved into the royal guest house by Nandi and Kanakhala’s efficient aide. Shiva
sat down on a comfortable bench overlooking a bed of red and white roses. The
charming cool breeze in the open gardens brought a smile to his face. It was early
afternoon and the garden was deserted. Shiva’s thoughts kept going back to the
conversation he had had with the Emperor in the morning. Despite Daksha’s controlled
reaction, Shiva could understand that his blue throat was of great significance to the
Meluhans, even to the Emperor. It meant that the legend of the Neelkanth, whatever it
was, was not restricted to some small sect in Kashmir. If the Emperor himself took it so
seriously, all of Meluha must need the help of the Neelkanth.
But what the bloody hell do they want help for? They are so much more advanced than
us!
His thoughts were distracted by the sounds of a dhol , a percussion instrument and
some ghungroos
, anklets worn by dancers. Someone seemed to be practising in the
garden. A hedge separated the dance pavilion from the rest of the garden. Shiva,
himself a passionate dancer, would normally have stepped in to move to the rhythm of
the beat, but his mind was preoccupied. Some words floated in from the group that was
dancing.
‘No my lady, you must let yourself go,’ said a distinguished male voice. ‘It’s not a chore
that you have to do. Enjoy the dance. You are trying too hard to remember all the steps
rather than letting the emotion of the dance flow through you.’
Then a lady’s voice interjected. ‘My lady, Guruji is right. You are dancing correcdy, but
not enjoying it. The concentration shows on your face. You have to relax a little bit.’
‘Let me get the steps right first. Then I can learn to enjoy them.’
The last voice made Shiva’s hair stand up on end. It was her. It was Sati. He quickly got
up and followed the sound of the voices. Coming up from behind the hedge, he saw Sati
dancing on a small platform. She had her hands raised rigidly to her sides as she
enacted the various movements of the dance. She danced in accordance with the steps
first to the left and then to the right. She moved her shapely hips to the side and placed
her hands precisely on her waist, to convey the mood of the dance. He was
mesmerised once again.
However, he did notice that though Sati was dancing all her steps correctly, the Guruji
was right. She was moving in a mechanical manner; the uninhibited surrender that is
characteristic of a natural dancer was absent. The varying emotions of bliss and anger
of the story being told were missing in her moves. And unlike a proficient dancer, Sati
wasn’t using the entire platform. Her steps were small, which kept her movements
constricted to the centre.
The dance teacher sat facing her and playing on a dhol to give Sati her beats. Her
companion Krittika sat to the right. It was the dance teacher who noticed Shiva first and
immediately stood up. Sati and Krittika turned around as well and were clearly
astonished to find Shiva standing in front of them. Unlike Sati, Krittika could not control
her surprise and blurted out, ‘Shiva?’
Sati, in her characteristic composed and restrained manner, asked sincerely, ‘Is
everything alright, Shiva? Do you need my help for something?’

 How have you been? I’ve missed you. Don’t you ever smile?
Shiva continued to stare at Sati, the words running through his mind, not on his lips. A
smiling Krittika looked at Sati for her reaction. An even more serious Sati repeated, very
politely, ‘Can I help you with something, Shiva?’
‘No, no, I don’t need any help,’ replied Shiva as reality seemed to enter his
consciousness again. ‘I just happened to be in the area and heard your dancing. I mean
your talk. Your dance steps were not so hard that I could hear it. You were dancing very
accurately. Actually, technically it was all...’
Krittika interjected. ‘You know a bit about dancing, do you?’
‘Oh, not much. Just a little,’ said Shiva to Krittika with a smile, before turning rapidly
back to Sati. ‘My apologies Sati, but Guruji is right. You were being far too methodical.
As they say in the land that I come from, the mudras
and the kriyas
were all
technically correct. But the bhav or emotion was missing. And a dance without bhav is
like a body without a soul. When the emotions of the dancer participate, she would not
even need to remember the steps. The steps come on their own. The bhav is something
that you cannot learn. It comes to you if you can create the space in your heart for it.’
Sati listened patiently to Shiva without saying a word. Her eyebrows were raised slightly
as the barbarian spoke. How could he know more than a Suryavanshi about dancing?
But she reminded herself that he had saved her life. She was duty bound to honour him.
Krittika, however, took offence at this caste-unmarked foreigner pretending that he knew
more about dancing than her mistress. She glowered at Shiva. ‘You dare to think that
you know more than one of the best dancers in the realm?’
Shiva gathered he may have caused some offence. He turned to Sati in all seriousness.
‘I am terribly sorry. I didn’t mean to insult you in any way. Sometimes I just keep talking
without realising what I am saying.’
‘No, no’, replied Sati. ‘You did not insult me. Perhaps you are right. I don’t feel the
essence of the dance as much as I should. But I am sure that with Guruji’s guidance, I
will pick it up in due time.’
Seizing his chance to impress Sati, Shiva said, ‘If it is alright with you, may I perform the
dance? I am sure that I am not as technically correct as you. But perhaps, there may be
something in the sentiment that will guide me through the correct steps.’
That was wellput! She can’t say no!
Sati looked surprised. This was unexpected. ‘Umm, okay,’ she managed to say.
A delighted Shiva immediately moved to the centre of the stage. He took off the
angvastram covering his upper body and tossed it aside. Krittika’s quick anger at the
perceived insult to her mistress was forgotten quickly as she sighed at Shiva’s rippling
physique. Sati, though, began to wonder how Shiva would bend such a muscular body
into the contortions that were required for this style of dancing. Flexibility was usually
sacrificed by a human body at the altar of strength.
Playing lightly on his dhol, the Guruji asked Shiva, ‘Tell me the beat that you are
comfortable with, young man.’
Shiva folded his hands into a namaste, bent low and said, ‘Guruji, could you just give
me a minute please? I need to prepare for the dance.’
Dancing was something Shiva knew as well as warfare. Facing east, he closed his eyes
and bowed his head slightly. Then he bent down on his knees and reverentially touched
the ground with his head. Standing up, he turned his right foot outwards. Then he raised
his left leg off the floor in a graceful arching movement till the foot was above knee
height, as he bent his right knee slightly to balance himself. His left foot pointed in a
direction exactly between the bearing of his right foot and his face. Only a calm breeze
broke the almost deathly silence that enveloped the audience. The Guruji, Sati and
Krittika looked in amazement at Shiva. They did not understand what he was doing but
could feel the energy that Shiva’s stance was emanating.

 Shiva raised both his arms in an elegant circular movement to the sides to bring them in
line with his shoulder. His right hand was moulded into a position like it was holding an
imaginary dumru , a small, handheld percussion instrument. His left hand was open with
its palm facing upward, almost like it was receiving some divine energy. He held this
pose for some time; as his glowing face showed that Shiva was withdrawing into his
own world. Then his right hand moved effortlessly forward, almost as if it had a mind of
its own. Its palm was now open and facing the audience. Somehow, the posture
seemed to convey a feeling of protection to a very surprised Sati. His left arm then
moved slowly from its shoulder height position to come in front of him with the palm
facing down. The left arm stopped moving when the hand was pointing almost directiy
at the left foot. Shiva held this pose for some time. And then began the dance.
Sati stared in wonder at Shiva. He was performing the same steps as her. Yet it looked
like a completely different dance. His hands moved effortlessly as his body moved
almost magically.
How could a body this muscular also be so flexible? The Guruji tried helplessly to get
his dhol to give Shiva the beats. But clearly that wasn’t necessary. For it was Shiva’s
feet which were leading the beat for the dhol!
The dance conveyed the various emotions of a woman. At the beginning it conveyed
her feelings of joy and lust as she cavorted with her husband. Then it conveyed her fury
and pain on the wrongful death of her mate. Even with Shiva’s rough masculine body,
he managed to convey the tender yet strong emotions of a grieving woman.
Shiva’s eyes were open. But the audience realised that he was oblivious to them. Shiva
was in his own world. He did not dance for the audience. He did not dance for
appreciation. He did not dance for the music. He danced only for himself. Rather, it
almost seemed like his dance was guided by a celestial force. Sati realised that Shiva
was right. He had opened himself and the dance had come to him.
After what seemed like an eternity the dance came to an end, with Shiva firmly shutting
his eyes. He held the final pose for a long time as the glow slowly left him. It was almost
like he was returning to this world. Shiva gradually opened his eyes to find Sati, Krittika
and the Guruji gaping at him in complete awe.
The Guruji was the first to find his voice. ‘Who are you?’
‘I am Shiva.’
‘No, no. Not the body. I meant who are you? ’
Shiva crooked his eyes together in a frown and repeated, ‘I am Shiva.’
‘Guruji, may I ask a question?’ asked Sati.
‘Of course you may.’
Turning to Shiva, Sati asked, ‘What was that you did before the dance? Was it some
kind of preparatory step?’
‘Yes. It’s called the Natarajpose.
The pose of the Lord of dance!
‘The Nataraj pose? What does it do?’
‘It aligned my energy to the universal energy so that the dance emerges on its own.’
‘I don’t understand.’
‘Well, it’s like this: amongst our people, we believe that everything in the world is a
carrier of shakti or energy . The plants, animals, objects, our bodies, everything carries
and transmits energy. But the biggest carrier of energy that we are physically in touch
with is Mother Earth herself — the ground that we walk on.’
‘What does that have to do with your dance?’
‘For anything that you do, you need energy. You have to source the energy around you.
The energy comes from people, from objects, from Mother Earth herself. You have to
ask for that energy respectfully.’
‘And your Nataraj pose helps you to access any energy that you want?’ asked the
Guruji.

 ‘It depends on what I want the energy for. The Nataraj pose helps me to ask respectfully
for energy for a dance that wants to come to me. If I wanted the energy for a thought to
come to me, I would have to sit cross-legged and meditate.’
‘It seems that the energy favours you, young man,’ said the Guruji. ‘You are the Nataraj,
the Lord of dance! ’
‘Oh no!’ exclaimed Shiva. ‘I am just a medium of the boundless Nataraj energy. Anyone
can be the medium.’
‘Well, then you are a particularly efficient medium, young man,’ said the Guruji. Turning
to Sati, he said, ‘You don’t need me if you have a friend like him, my child. If you want to
be taught by Shiva, it would be my honour to excuse myself.’
Shiva looked at Sati expectantly. This had gone much better than he expected.
Say yes, dammit!
Sati however seemed to withdraw into herself. Shiva was starded to see the first signs
of vulnerability in this woman. She bowed her head, an act which did not suit her proud
bearing and whispered softly, ‘I mean no disrespect to anyone, but perhaps I do not
have the skills to receive training of this level.’
‘But you do have the skill,’ argued Shiva. ‘You have the bearing. You have the heart.
You can very easily reach that level.’
Sati looked up at Shiva, her eyes showing just the slightest hint of dampness. The
profound sadness they conveyed took Shiva aback.
What the hell is going on?
‘I am very far from any level, Shiva,’ mumbled Sati.
As she said that, Sati found the strength to control herself again. The politely proud
manner returned to her face. The mask was back. ‘It is time for my puja. With your
permission Guruji, I must leave.’ She turned towards Shiva. ‘It was a pleasure meeting
you again Shiva.’
Before Shiva could respond, Sati turned quickly and left, followed by Krittika.
The Guruji continued to stare at a flummoxed Shiva. At length, he bent low with a formal
namaste towards Shiva and said, ‘It has been my life’s honour to see you dance.’
Then he too turned and left. Shiva was left wondering at the inscrutable ways of the
Meluhans.

 
It was late in the morning the next day when Shiva and Nandi entered the private royal
office to find Daksha, Parvateshwar and Kanakhala waiting for him. A surprised Shiva
said, ‘I am sorry your Highness. I thought we were to meet four hours into the second
prahar. I hope I haven’t kept you waiting.’
Daksha, who had stood up with a formal namaste, bowed low and said, ‘No, my Lord.
You don’t need to apologise. We came in early so that we wouldn’t keep you waiting. It
was our honour to wait for you.’
Parvateshwar rolled his eyes at the extreme subservience that his emperor, the ruler of
the greatest civilisation ever established,
showed towards this barbarian. Shiva,
controlling his extreme surprise at being referred to as the ‘Lord’ by the emperor, bowed
low towards Daksha with a namaste and sat down.
‘My Lord, before I start off my monologue about the legend of the Neelkanth, do you
have any questions that you would like to ask?’ enquired Daksha.
The most obvious question came to Shiva’s mind first.
Why in the holy lake’s name is my blessed blue throat so important?
But his instincts told him that though this appeared to be the most obvious question, it
could not be answered unless he understood more about the society of Meluha itself.
‘It may sound like an unusual question your Highness,’ said Shiva. ‘But may I ask what

 your age is?’
Daksha looked in surprise at Kanakhala. Then turning back towards Shiva with an awed
smile, he said, ‘You are exceptionally intelligent my Lord. You have asked the most
pertinent question first.’ Crinkling his face into a conspiratorial grin, Daksha continued,
‘Last month I turned one hundred and eighty four.’
Shiva was stunned. Daksha did not look a day older than thirty years. In fact nobody in
Meluha looked old. Except for the Pandit that Shiva had met at the Brahma temple.
So Nandi is more than a hundred years old.
‘How can this be, your Highness?’ asked a flabbergasted Shiva. ‘What sorcery makes
this possible?’
‘There is no sorcery at all my Lord,’ explained Daksha. ‘What makes this possible is the
brilliance of our scientists who make a potion called the Somras,
the drink, of the
gods . Taking the Somras at defined times not only postpones our death considerably,
but it also allows us to live our entire Eves as if we are in the prime of our youth —
mentally and physically’
‘But what is the Somras? Where does it come from? Who invented it?’
‘So many questions my Lord,’ smiled Daksha. ‘But I will try my best to answer them one
by one. The Somras was invented many thousands of years ago by one of the greatest
Indian scientists that ever lived. His name was Lord Brahma.’
‘I think there is a temple dedicated to him that I visited on the way to Devagiri. At a place
named Meru?’
‘Yes my Lord. That is where he is said to have lived and worked. Lord Brahma was a
prolific inventor. But he never took any of the benefits of his inventions for himself. He
was always interested in ensuring that his inventions were used for the good of
mankind. He realised early on that a potion as powerful as the Somras could be
misused by evil men. So he implemented an elaborate system of controls on its use.’
‘What kind of controls?’
‘He did not give the Somras freely to everyone,’ continued Daksha. After conducting a
rigorous country-wide survey, he chose a select group of adolescent
boys of
impeccable character — one from each of the seven regions of ancient India. He chose
young boys so that they would live with him at his gurukul and he could mould their
character into selfless helpers of society. The Somras medicine was administered only
on these boys. Since these boys were practically given an additional life due to the
Somras, they came to be known as the dwija or twice born . With the strength of the
Somras, the training of Lord Brahma and the numerous other inventions that they
collectively produced, this group became more powerful than anyone in history. They
honed their minds to achieve almost superhuman intelligence. The ancient Indian title
for men of knowledge was Rishi . Since Lord Brahma’s chosen men were seven in
number, they came to be known as the Saptrishi ?
‘And these Saptrishis used their skills for the good of society’
‘Yes my Lord. Lord Brahma instituted strict rules of conduct for the Saptrishis. They
were not allowed to rule or to practice any trade — essentially anything that would have
caused them personal gain. They had to use their skills to do the task of priests,
teachers, doctors, amongst other intellectual professions where they could use their
powers to help society. They were not allowed to charge anything for their services and
had to live on alms and donations from others.’
‘Tough service rules,’ joked Shiva with a slight wink at Parvateshwar.
Parvateshwar
did not respond but Daksha, Kanakhala and Nandi guffawed loudly.
Shiva took a quick look at the prahar lamp by the window. It was almost the third prahar.
The time that Sati would probably come out to dance.
‘But they followed their code of conduct stricdy my Lord,’ continued Daksha. ‘Over time,
as their responsibilities grew, the Saptrishis selected many more people to join their

 tribe. Their followers swore by the same code that the Saptrishis lived by and were also
administered the Somras. They devoted their lives to the pursuit of knowledge and for
the wellbeing of society without asking for any material gain in return. It is for this reason
that society accorded these people almost devotional respect. Over the ages the
Saptrishis and their followers came to be known as the Tribe of Brahma or simply, the
Brahmins ’.
‘But as it usually happens with all good systems over long periods of time, some people
stopped following the Brahmin code, right?’
‘Absolutely, my Lord,’ answered Daksha, shaking his head at the all too familiar human
frailty. ‘As many millennia went by, some of the Brahmins forgot the strict code that Lord
Brahma had enforced and the Saptrishis propagated. They started misusing the
awesome powers that the Somras gave them for their own personal gains. Some
Brahmins started using their influence over large number of people to conquer
kingdoms and start ruling. Some Brahmins misused other inventions of the Saptrishis
and Lord Brahma to accumulate fabulous wealth for themselves.’
‘And some of the Brahmins,’ interjected Kanakhala with a particular sense of horror,
‘even rebelled against the Saptrishi Uttradhikaris ’.
‘Saptrishi Uttradhikaris?’ inquired Shiva.
‘They were the successors
to the Saptrishis
my Lord,’ clarified Kanakhala. ‘When any
of the Saptrishis knew that he was coming to the end of his mortal life, he would appoint
a man from his gurukul as his successor. This successor was treated for all practical
purposes like the Saptrishi himself.’
‘So rebelling against the Saptrishi Uttradhikaris was like rebelling against the Saptrishis
themselves?’
‘Yes, my Lord,’ answered Kanakhala. ‘And the most worrying part of this corruption was
that it was being led by the higher chosen-tribe Brahmins like the eagles, peacocks and
the swans. In fact, due to their higher status, these chosen-tribes were actually not even
allowed to work under the Kshatriyas and Vaishyas, lest they get enticed by the lure of
the material world. Yet they succumbed to the temptations of evil before anyone else.’
‘And chosen-tribes like yours, the pigeons, remained loyal to the old code despite
working for the Kshatriyas?’ asked Shiva.
‘Yes, my Lord,’ replied Kanakhala, her chest puffed up with pride.
The town bell indicating the beginning of the third prahar sounded out loudly. All the
people in the room, including Shiva, said a quick short prayer welcoming the new time
chapter. Shiva had learnt some of the ways of the Meluhans. A Shudra came in, reset
the prahar lamp precisely and left as quiedy as he came. Shiva reminded himself that
anytime now Sati would start her dance in the garden.
‘So what revolution caused the change your Highness?’ asked Shiva turning to Daksha.
‘You, Parvateshwar
and Nandi are Kshatriyas and yet you clearly have taken the
Somras. In fact I have seen people of all four castes in your empire look youthful and
healthy. This means that the Somras is now given to everybody. This change must have
obviously happened due to a revolution, right?’
‘Yes, my Lord. And the revolution was known as Lord Ram. The greatest emperor that
ever lived! Jai Shri Ram!’
‘Jai Shri Ram!’ repeated everyone in the room.
‘His ideas and leadership transformed the society of Meluha dramatically,’ continued
Daksha. ‘In fact, the course of history itself was radically altered. But before I continue
with Lord Ram’s tale, may I make a suggestion?’
‘Of course, your Highness.’
‘It is into the third prahar now. Should we move to the dining room and partake of some
lunch before continuing with this story?’
‘I think it is an excellent idea to have lunch your Highness,’ said Shiva. ‘But may I be

 excused for some time? There is another pressing engagement that I have. Could we
perhaps continue our conversation tomorrow if that is suitable to you?’
Kanakhala’s
face fell immediately
while Parvateshwar’s
was covered with a
contemptuous grin. Daksha, however, kept a smiling face. ‘Of course we could meet
tomorrow my Lord. Will the beginning of the second hour of the second prahar be all
right with you?’
‘Absolutely, your Highness. My apologies for this inconvenience.’
‘Not at all my Lord,’ said an ever smiling Daksha. ‘Can one of my chariots take you to
your destination?’
‘That’s very kind of you, your Highness. But I will go there myself. My apologies once
again.’
Bidding a namaste to everyone in the room, Shiva and Nandi walked quickly out.
Kanakhala looked accusingly at Daksha. The emperor just nodded his head, gesturing
with his hands for calm. ‘It’s all right. We are meeting tomorrow, aren’t we?’
‘My Lord, we are running out of time,’ said Kanakhala. The Neelkanth needs to accept
his responsibilities immediately!’
‘Give him time, Kanakhala. We have waited for so long. A few days is not going to
cause a collapse!’
Parvateshwar
got up suddenly, bowed low towards Daksha and said, ‘With your
permission your Highness, may I be excused? There are more practical things that
need my attention as compared to educating a barbarian.’
‘You will speak of him with respect Parvateshwar,’
growled Kanakhala. ‘He is the
Neelkanth!’
‘I will speak of him with respect only when he has earned it through some real
achievements,’ snarled Parvateshwar. ‘I respect only achievements, nothing else. That
is the fundamental rule of Lord Ram. Only your karma is important. Not your birth. Not
your sex. And certainly not the colour of your throat. Our entire society is based on
merit. Or have you forgotten that?’
‘Enough!’ exclaimed Daksha. ‘I respect the Neelkanth. That means everybody will
respect him!’

  
CHAPTER 6
Vikarma, the Carriers of Bad Fate
 
Nandi waited at a distance in the garden as he had been asked to, while Shiva went
behind the hedge to the dance area. The silent dance stage had already convinced
Nandi that his Lord would not find anybody there. However, Shiva was filled with hope
and waited expectandy for Sati. After having waited for the larger part of an hour, Shiva
realised that there would be no dance practice today. Deeply disappointed, he walked
silendy back to Nandi.
‘Is there somebody I can help you find, my Lord?’ asked an earnest Nandi.
‘No Nandi. Forget it.’
Trying to change the topic, Nandi said, ‘My Lord, you must be hungry. Should we go
back to the guest house and eat?’
‘No, I’d like to see a litde more of the city,’ said Shiva, hoping that fate would be kind to
him and he would run into Sati in the town. ‘Shall we go to one of the restaurants on the
Rajat platform?’
‘That would be wonderful!’ smiled Nandi who hated the simple Brahmin-influenced
vegetarian food served at the royal guest house. He missed the spicy meats that were
served in rough Kshatriya restaurants.

 
‘Yes, what is it Parvateshwar?’ asked Daksha.
‘My Lord, I am sorry for the sudden meeting. But I just received some disturbing news
and had to tell you this in private.’
‘Well, what is it?’
‘Shiva is already causing trouble.’
‘What have you got against the Neelkanth,’ groaned Daksha, raising his eyes in
disapproval. ‘Why can’t you believe that the Neelkanth has come to save us?’
‘This has nothing to do with my views on Shiva, my Lord. If you will please listen to my
news. Chenardhwaj saw Shiva in the gardens yesterday’
‘Chenardhwaj is here already?’
‘Yes your Highness. His review with you has been fixed for the day after tomorrow’
‘Anyway, so what did Chenardhwaj see?’
‘He is also sickeningly taken in by the Neelkanth. So I think we can safely assume that
he doesn’t have any prejudice.’
‘All right, I believe you. So what did he see the Neelkanth do?’
‘He saw Shiva dancing in the gardens,’ answered Parvateshwar.
‘So? Is there a law banning dance that I am not aware of?’
‘Please let me continue, your Highness. He was dancing while Sati watched in rapt
attention.’
His interest suddenly captivated, Daksha leaned forward to ask, ‘And?’
‘Sati behaved correcdy and left the moment Shiva tried to get too familiar. But
Chenardhwaj heard Shiva whisper something when Sati left.’
‘Well, what did he whisper?’
‘He whispered — Holy Lake, help me get her. I will not ask for anything else from you
ever again!’

 Daksha appeared delighted. ‘You mean the Neelkanth may actually be in love with my
daughter?’
‘Your Highness, you cannot forget the laws of the land,’ exclaimed a horrified
Parvateshwar. You know that Sati cannot marry’
‘If the Neelkanth decided to marry Sati, no law on earth can stop him.’
‘My Lord, forgive me. But the entire basis of our civilisation is that nobody is above the
law. That’s what makes us who we are. Better than the Chandravanshis and the Nagas.
Not even Lord Ram was above the law. Then how can this barbarian be considered so
important?’
‘Don’t you want Sati to be happy?’ asked Daksha. ‘She’s also called Parvati for a
reason — it’s because she is your goddaughter. Don’t you want her to find joy again?’
‘I love Sati like the daughter I never had, your Highness,’ said Parvateshwar, with a rare
display of emotion in his eyes. ‘I would do anything for her. Except break the law.’
‘That is the difference between you and me. For Sati’s sake, I would not mind breaking
any law. She is my daughter. My flesh and blood. She has suffered enough already. If I
can find some way to make her happy, I will do it. No matter what the consequences!’

 
Shiva and Nandi tied their horses in the designated area next to the main Raj at
platform market. Walking forward, Nandi guided Shiva towards one of his favourite
restaurants. The inviting aroma of freshly cooked meat brought forth a long-lost hunger
in Nandi that had not been satisfied in the past two days at the royal guest house. The
owner however stopped Shiva at the entry.
‘What’s the matter, brother?’ asked Nandi.
‘I am deeply sorry brothers. But I too am undergoing religious vows at this time,’ said
the restaurant owner politely, pointing to the beads around his throat. ‘And you know
that one of the vows is that I cannot serve meat to fellow religious vow keepers.’
Nandi blurted out in surprise, ‘But who has taken religious...’
He was stopped by Shiva who signalled downwards with his eyes at the bead covered
cravat around his throat. Nandi nodded and followed Shiva out of the restaurant.
‘This is the time of the year for religious vows, my Lord,’ explained Nandi. Why don’t you
wait on the side? There are some good restaurants on the lane at the right. I will just go
and check if we have a restaurant owner who has not taken his vows.’
Shiva nodded his ascent. As Nandi hurried off, Shiva looked around the street. It was a
busy market area with restaurants and shops spread evenly. But despite the large
number of people and the commerce being conducted, the street was not bursting with
noise. None of the shopkeepers came out to scream and advertise their wares. The
customers spoke softly and in an unfailingly polite manner, even if they were bargaining.
These well-mannered idiots would not be able to get any business done in our
boisterous mountain market!
Shiva, lost in his thoughts about the strange practices of the Meluhans, did not hear the
announcement of the town crier till he was almost right behind him.
‘Procession of vikarma women. Please move!’
A surprised Shiva turned around to find a tall Meluhan Kshatriya looking down at him.
‘Would you like to move aside, sir? A procession of vikarma women needs to pass for
their prayers.’
The crier’s tone and demeanour was unquestionably courteous. But Shiva was under
no illusions. The crier was not asking
Shiva to move. He was telling
him. Shiva
stepped back to let the procession pass as Nandi touched him gendy on his arm.
‘I have found a good restaurant, my Lord,’ said an ecstatic Nandi. ‘One of my favourites.
And his kitchen is going to run for at least an hour more. A lot of food to stuff ourselves

 with!’
Shiva laughed out loud. ‘It’s a wonder that just one restaurant can actually make
enough food to satisfy your hunger!’
Nandi laughed along good naturedly as Shiva patted his friend on the back.
As they turned and walked into the lane, Shiva asked, ‘Who are vikarma women?’
‘Vikarma people, my Lord,’ said Nandi sighing deeply, ‘are people who have been
punished in this birth for the sins of their previous birth. Hence they have to live this life
out with dignity and tolerate their present sufferings with grace. This is the only way they
can wipe their karma clean of the sins of their previous births. Vikarma men have their
own order of penance and women have a different order.’
‘There was a procession of vikarma women on the road we just left. Is their puja a part
of the order?’ asked Shiva.
‘Yes, my Lord. There are many rules that the vikarma women have to follow. They have
to pray for forgiveness every month to Lord Agni, the purifying Fire God, through a
specifically mandated puja. They are not allowed to marry since they may poison others
with their bad fate. They are not allowed to touch any person who is not related to them
or is not part of their normal duties. There are many other conditions as well that I am
not completely aware of. If you are interested, we could meet up with a Pandit at the
Agni temple later and he could tell you all about vikarma people.’
‘No, I am not interested in meeting the Pandit right now,’ said Shiva with a smile. ‘He
might just bore me with some very confusing and abstruse philosophies! But tell me one
thing. Who decides that the vikarma people had committed sins in their previous birth?’
‘Their own karma, my Lord,’ said Nandi, his eyes pointing at the obvious. ‘For example if
a woman gives birth to a still born child, why would she be punished thus unless she
had committed some terrible sin in her previous birth. Or if a man suddenly contracts an
incurable disease and gets paralysed, why would it happen to him unless the universe
was penalising him for the sins of his previous life.’
‘That sounds pretty ridiculous to me. A woman could have given birth to a still born child
simply because she did not take proper care while she was pregnant. Or it could just be
a disease. How can anyone say that she is being punished for the sins of her previous
birth?’
Nandi, shocked by Shiva’s opinion, struggled to find words to respond. He was a
Meluhan and deeply believed in the concept of karma being carried over many births.
He mumbled sofdy, ‘It’s the law, my Lord...’
‘Well, to be honest, it sounds like a rather unfair law to me.’
Nandi’s crestfallen face showed that he was profoundly disappointed that Shiva did not
understand such a fundamental concept about Meluha. But he also kept his counsel for
fear of opposing what Shiva said. After all, Shiva was his Lord.
Seeing a dejected Nandi, Shiva patted him gendy on the back. ‘Nandi, that was just my
opinion. If the law works for your people, I am sure there must be some logic to it. Your
society might be a litde strange at times, but it has some of the most honest and decent
people I have ever met.’
As a smile returned almost instantly to Nandi’s face, his whole being was overcome by
his immediate problem. His debilitating hunger! He entered the restaurant as a man on
a mission, with Shiva chuckling softly behind.
A short distance away on the main road, the procession of vikarma women walked
silently on. They were all draped in long angvastrams which were dyed in the holy blue
colour. Their heads were bowed low in penitence, their puja thalis or prayer plates full
of offerings to Lord Agni. The normally quiet market street became almost deathly silent
as the pitiful women lumbered by. At the centre of the procession, unseen by Shiva,
with her head bowed low, draped in a blue angvastram that covered her from head to
toe, her face a picture of resigned dignity, trudged the forlorn figure of Sati.

  
‘So where were we, my Lord?’ said Daksha, as Shiva and Nandi setded down in his
private office the next morning.
‘We were about to discuss the changes that Lord Ram brought about, your Highness.
And how he defeated the rebellion of the renegade Brahmins,’ answered Shiva.
‘That’s right,’ said Daksha. ‘Lord Ram did defeat the renegade Brahmins. But in his
view, the core problem went deeper. It wasn’t just an issue of some Brahmins who did
not follow the code. The problem was a conflict between a person’s natural karma and
what society forced him to do.’
‘I didn’t understand your Highness.’
‘If you think about it, what was the essential problem with the renegade Brahmins?
Some of them wanted to be Kshatriyas and rule. Some of them wanted to be Vaishyas,
make money and live a life of luxury. However, their birth confined them to being
Brahmins.’
‘But I thought that Lord Brahma had decreed that people became Brahmins through a
competitive examination process,’ said Shiva.
‘That is true my Lord. But over time this process of selection lost its fairness. Children of
Bralimins became Brahmins. Children of Kshatriyas became Kshatriyas and so on. The
formal system of selection soon ceased to exist. A father would ensure that his children
got all the resources and support needed to grow up and become a member of his own
caste. So the caste system became rigid.’
‘So did that also mean that there could have been a person talented enough to be a
Brahmin but if he was born to Shudra parents, he would not get the opportunity to
become a Brahmin?’ asked Shiva.
‘Yes Shiva,’ said Parvateshwar, speaking for the first time to Shiva. He noticed that
Parvateshwar did not fawn over him and call him Lord. ‘In Lord Ram’s view, any society
that conducted its transactions based on anything besides merit could not be stable. His
view was that a person’s caste should be decided only on that person’s
karma . Not his
birth. Not his sex. No other reason should interfere.’
‘That is nice in theory, Parvateshwar,’
argued Shiva. ‘But how do you ensure it in
practice. If a child is born in a Brahmin family, he would get the upbringing and
resources which would be different from that of a child born in a Shudra family. So this
child would grow up to be a Brahmin even if he was less talented than the Shudra boy.
Isn’t this unfair to the child born in the Shudra family? Where is the “merit” in this
system?’
‘That was the genius of Lord Ram, Shiva,’ smiled Parvateshwar. ‘He was of course a
brave general, a brilliant administrator and a fair judge. But his greatest legacy is the
system he created to ensure that a person’s karma is determined only by his abilities,
nothing else. That system is what has made Meluha what it is — the greatest nation in
history’
‘You can’t underestimate the role that Somras has played, Parvateshwar,’ said Daksha.
‘Lord Ram’s greatest act was to provide the Somras to everyone. The elixir is what
makes Meluhans the smartest people in the universe! The Somras is what has given us
the ability to create this remarkable and near perfect society.’
‘Begging your pardon, your Highness,’ said Shiva before turning back to Parvateshwar.
‘But what was the system that Lord Ram set up?’
‘The system is simple,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘As we agreed, the best society is when a
person’s caste is decided only by his abilities and karma. Not by any other factor. Lord
Ram created a practical system that ensured this. All children that are born in Meluha
are compulsorily adopted by the empire. To ensure that this is done methodically, a

 great hospital city called Maika was built deep in the south, just north of the Narmada
river. All pregnant women have to travel there for their delivery. Only pregnant women
are allowed into the city. Nobody else.’
‘Nobody else? What about her husband, her parents?’ asked Shiva.
‘No, there are no exceptions to this rule except for one. This exception was voted in
around three hundred years ago. Husbands and parents of women of noble families
were allowed to enter,’ answered Parvateshwar, his expression clearly showing that he
violendy disagreed with this corruption of Lord Ram’s system.
‘Then who takes care of the pregnant woman in Maika?’
‘The hospital staff. They are well trained in this,’ continued Parvateshwar. ‘Once the
child is born, he or she is kept in Maika for a few weeks for health reasons while the
mother travels back to her own city’
‘Without her child?’ asked a clearly surprised Shiva.
‘Yes,’ replied Parvateshwar, with a slight frown as if this was the most obvious fact in
the world. ‘The child is then put into the Meluha Gurukul, a massive school created by
the empire close to Maika. Every single child receives the benefit of exacdy the same
education system. They grow up with all the resources of the empire available to them.’
‘Do they maintain records of the parents and their children?’
‘Of course they do. But the records are kept in utmost secrecy and only with the recordkeeper of Maika.’
‘That would mean that in the Gurukul or in the rest of the empire, nobody would know
who the child’s birth parents are,’ reasoned Shiva, as he worked out the implications of
what he was hearing. ‘So every child, whether born to a Brahmin or a Shudra, would get
exacdy the same treatment at the Gurukul?’
‘Yes,’ smiled Parvateshwar. He was clearly proud of the system. ‘As the children enter
the age of adolescence, they are all given the Somras. Thus every child has exactly the
same opportunity to succeed. At the age of fifteen, when they have reached adulthood,
all the children are given a comprehensive examination. The results of this examination
decide which varna or caste the child will be allocated to — Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya
or Shudra.’
Kanakhala cut in. ‘And then the children are given one more year’s caste-specific
training. They wear their varna colour bands — white for Brahmins, red for Kshatriyas,
green for Vaishyas and black for Shudras — and retreat to the respective caste schools
to complete their education.’
‘So that’s why your caste system is called the varna system,’ said Shiva. ‘Varna means
colour, right?’
‘Yes my Lord,’ smiled Kanakhala. You are very observant.’
With a withering look at Kanakhala, Parvateshwar added sarcastically, ‘Yes, that was a
very difficult conclusion to draw.’
Ignoring the barb, Shiva asked, ‘So what happens after that?’
‘When the children turn sixteen, they are allocated to applicant parents from their caste.
For example, if some Brahmin parents had applied to adopt a child, one randomly
chosen student from Maika, who had won the Brahmin caste in the examination, will be
allotted to them. Then the child grows up with these adopted parents as their own child.’
‘And society is perfect,’ marvelled Shiva, as the simple brilliance of the system
enveloped his mind. ‘Each person is given a position in society based only on his own
abilities. The efficiency and fairness of this system is astounding!’
‘Over time my Lord,’ interjected Daksha, ‘we found the percentage of higher castes
actually going up in the population. Which means that everybody in the world has the
ability to excel. All it takes is for a child to be given a fair chance to succeed.’
‘Then the lower castes must have loved Lord Ram for this?’ asked Shiva. ‘He gave
them an actual chance to succeed.’

 ‘Yes they did love him,’ answered Parvateshwar. ‘They were his most loyal followers.
Jai Shri Ram!’
‘But I guess not too many mothers would have been happy with this. I can’t imagine a
woman willingly giving up her child as soon as he is born with no chance of meeting him
ever again.’
‘But it’s for the larger good,’ said Parvateshwar,
scowling at the seemingly stupid
question. ‘And in any case, every mother who wants an offspring can apply for one and
be allocated a child who suits her position and dreams. Nothing can be worse for a
mother than having a child who does not measure up to her expectations.’
Shiva frowned at Parvateshwar’s
explanation, but let the argument pass. ‘I can also
imagine that many of the upper castes like the Brahmins would have been unhappy with
Lord Ram. After all, they lost their stranglehold on power.’
‘Yes,’ added Daksha. ‘Many upper castes did oppose Lord Ram’s reforms. Not just
Brahmins, but even Kshatriyas and Vaishyas. Lord Ram fought a great battle to defeat
them. Those of the vanquished who survived are the Chandravanshis we see today’
‘So your differences go that far back?’
‘Yes,’ said Daksha. ‘The Chandravanshis are corrupt and disgusting people. No morals.
No ethics. They are the source of all our problems. Some of us believe that Lord Ram
was too kind. He should have completely destroyed them. But he forgave them and let
them live. In fact, we have to face the mortification of seeing the Chandravanshis rule
over Lord Ram’s birthplace — Ayodhya!’
Before Shiva could react to this information, the bell of the new prahar was rung.
Everyone said a quick prayer to welcome the subsequent
time chapter. Shiva
immediately looked towards the window. A look of expectancy appeared on his face.
Daksha smiled as he observed Shiva’s expression. ‘We could break for lunch now, my
Lord. But if you have another engagement you would like to attend, we could continue
tomorrow’
Parvateshwar glared at Daksha disapprovingly. He knew exacdy what the emperor was
trying to do.
‘That would be nice, your Highness,’ smiled Shiva. ‘Is my face that transparent?’
‘Yes it is my Lord. But that is a gift you have. Nothing is prized more than honesty in
Meluha. Why don’t you leave for your engagement and we could convene here again
tomorrow morning?’
Thanking Daksha profusely, Shiva left the room with Nandi in tow.

 
Shiva approached the hedge with excitement and trepidation. The moment he heard the
sound of the dhol coming from the garden, he despatched Nandi to have lunch at the
guest house. He wanted to be alone. He let out a deep sigh of ecstasy as he crept
behind the hedge to find Sati practising under the watchful eye of the Guruji and Krittika.
‘So good to see you again, Shiva,’ said the Guruji as he stood up with a formal
namaste.
‘The pleasure is all mine, Guruji,’ said Shiva, as he bent down to touch the Guruji’s feet
as a sign of respect.
Sati watched silendy at a distance with her gaze on the floor. Krittika said
enthusiastically, ‘I just couldn’t get your dance out of my mind!’
Shiva blushed at the compliment. ‘Oh it wasn’t that good.’
‘Now you’re fishing for compliments,’ teased Krittika.
‘I was wondering if we could start off where we left last time,’ said Shiva, turning
towards Sati. ‘I don’t think I have to be your teacher or anything like that. I just wanted to
see you dance.’

 Sati felt her strange discomfort returning again. What was it about Shiva that made her
feel that she was breaking the law in speaking with him? She was allowed to talk to men
as long as she kept a respectable distance. Why should she feel guilty?
‘I will try my best,’ said Sati formally. ‘It would be enriching to hear your views on how I
can improve myself. I really do respect you for your dancing skills.’
Respect?! Why respect? Why not love?!
Shiva smiled politely. Something inside told him that saying anything at this point of time
would spoil the moment.
Sati took a deep breath, girded her angvastram around her waist and committed herself
to the Nataraj pose. Shiva smiled as he felt Mother Earth project her shakti, her energy,
into Sati.
Energised by the earth she stood upon, Sati began her dance. And she had really
improved. The emotions seemed to course through her. She was always good
technically, but the passion elevated her dance to the next level. Shiva felt a dreamy
sense of unreality overcome him again. Sati radiated a magnetic hold on him as she
moved her lithe body into the dance steps. For some moments, Shiva imagined that he
was the man that Sati was longing for in her dance. When she finally came to a stop,
the audience spontaneously applauded.
‘That was the best I have ever seen you dance,’ said the Guruji with pride.
‘Thank you Guruji,’ said Sati as she bowed. Then she looked expectandy at Shiva.
‘It was fantastic,’ exclaimed Shiva. ‘Absolutely fabulous. Didn’t I tell you that you had it
in you?’
‘I thought that I didn’t get it exactly right at the attacking sequence,’ said Sati critically.
‘You’re being too hard on yourself,’ consoled Shiva. ‘That was just a slight error. It
happened only because you missed one angle on your elbow. That made your next
move a little odd.’ Rising swiftly to his feet, Shiva continued, ‘See, I’ll show you.’
He walked quickly towards Sati and touched her elbow to move it to the correct angle.
Sati immediately recoiled in horror as there was a gasp from the Guruji as well as
Krittika. Shiva instantly realised that something terrible had happened.
‘I am sorry,’ said Shiva, with a look of sincere regret. ‘I was just trying to show you
where your elbow should be.’
Sati continued to stare at Shiva, stunned into immobility.
The Guruji was the first to recover his wits and realised that Shiva must undergo the
purification ceremony . ‘Go to your Pandit, Shiva. Tell him you need a shudhikaran . Go
before the day is over.’
‘What? What is a shudhikaran? Why would I need it?’
‘Please go for a shudhikaran, Shiva,’ said Sati, as tears broke through her proud eyes.
‘If something happened to you, I would never be able to forgive myself.’
‘Nothing will happen to me! Look, I am really sorry if I have broken some rule in
touching you. I will not do it again. Let’s not make a big deal out of this.’
‘IT IS A BIG DEAL!’ shouted Sati.
The violence of Sati’s reaction threw Shiva off balance.
Why the hell is this simple thing being blown completely out of proportion?
Krittika came close to Sati, careful not to touch her and whispered, ‘We should go back
home, my lady’
‘No. No. Please stay,’ pleaded Shiva. ‘I won’t touch you. I promise.’
With a look of hopeless despair, Sati turned to leave, followed by Krittika and Guruji. At
the edge of the hedge, she turned around and beseeched Shiva once again, ‘Please go
for your shudhikaran before nightfall. Please.’
At the look of uncomprehending mutiny on Shiva’s face, the Guruji advised, ‘Listen to
her, Shiva. She speaks for your own good.’

  
‘What bloody nonsense!’ yelled Shiva as his disturbed thoughts finally broke through his
desperate efforts at silent acceptance. He was lying in his bedroom at the royal guest
house. He had not undergone the shudhikaran. He had not even bothered to find out
what the ceremony was.
Why would I need to be purified for touching Sati? I want to spend all my
remainingyears touching her in every possible way. Am I going to keep on undergoing a
shudhikaran every day? Ridiculous!
Just then a troubling thought entered Shiva’s mind.
Is it because of me? Am I not allowed to touch her because I am caste-unmarked?
An
inferior barbarian?
‘No. That can’t be true,’ whispered Shiva to himself. ‘Sati doesn’t think like that. She is a
good woman.’
But what if it’s true? Maybe if she knows I am the Neelkanth...

  
CHAPTER 7
Lord Ram’s Unfinished Task
 
‘You seem to be a little distracted this morning, my Lord. Are you alright?’ asked a
concerned Daksha.
‘Hmm?’ said Shiva as he looked up. ‘I’m sorry your Highness. I was a litde distracted.’
Daksha looked with a concerned expression at Kanakhala. He had seen a similar look
of despair on Sati’s face at dinner the previous night. But she had refused to say
anything.
‘Do you want to meet later?’ asked Daksha.
‘Of course not, your Highness. It’s alright. My apologies. Please continue,’ said Shiva.
‘Well,’ continued a concerned Daksha, ‘we were talking about the changes that Lord
Ram brought about in society’
‘Yes,’ said Shiva, shaking his head slightly to get the disturbing image of Sati’s last plea
out of his mind.
‘The Maika system worked fantastically well. Our society boomed. Ours was always one
of the wealthiest lands on earth. But in the last one thousand two hundred years we
have shot dramatically ahead of everyone else. Meluha has become the richest and
most powerful country in the world by far. Our citizens lead ideal lives. There is no
crime. People do what they are suited for and not what an unfair social order would
compel them to do. We don’t force or fight unprovoked wars with any other country. In
fact, ours has become a perfect society.’
‘Yes, your Highness,’ agreed Shiva, slowly getting into the conversation. ‘I don’t believe
that perfection can ever be achieved. It is more of a journey than a destination. But your
society is certainly a near perfect society.’
‘Why do you think we are not perfect?’ argued Parvateshwar aggressively.
‘Do you think it is perfect Parvateshwar?’
asked Shiva politely. ‘Does everything in
Meluha go exactly as Lord Ram would have mandated?’
Parvateshwar fell silent. He knew the obvious, even if he didn’t like the answer.
‘The Lord is right Parvateshwar,’ said Daksha. ‘There are always things to improve.’
‘Having said that, your Highness,’ spoke Shiva, ‘your society is wonderful. Things do
seem very well ordered. What doesn’t make sense to me then, is why you and your
people are so concerned about the future. What is the problem? Why is a Neelkanth
required? I don’t see anything that is so obviously wrong that disaster would be just a
breath away. This is not like my homeland where there are so many problems that you
wouldn’t know where to begin!’
‘My Lord, a Neelkanth is needed because we are faced with challenges that we cannot
confront. We keep to ourselves and let other countries lead their lives. We trade with
other societies but we never interfere with them. We don’t allow uninvited foreigners into
Meluha beyond the frontier towns. So we think it’s only fair that other societies leave us
alone to lead our lives the way we want to.’
‘And presumably they don’t, your Highness?’
‘No they don’t.’
‘Why?’
‘One simple word, my Lord,’ replied Daksha. ‘Jealousy. They hate our superior ways.
Our efficient family system is an eyesore to them. The fact that we take care of
everyone in our country makes them unhappy because they can’t take care of

 themselves. They lead sorry lives. And rather than improving themselves, they want to
pull us down to their level.’
‘I can understand. My tribe used to face a lot of jealousy in Mount Kailash since we had
control over the shore of the Mansarovar Lake and hence the best land in the region.
But sometimes I wonder if we could have avoided bloodshed if we had shared our good
fortune more willingly.’
‘But we do share our good fortune with those who wish it, my Lord. And yet, jealousy
blinds our enemies. The Chandravanshis
realised that it was the Somras that
guaranteed our superiority. Funnily enough, even they have the knowledge of the
Somras. But they have not learnt to mass produce it like we do and hence haven’t
reaped all the benefits of it.’
‘Sorry to interrupt, your Highness, but where is the Somras produced?’
‘It is produced at a secret location called Mount Mandar. The Somras powder is
manufactured there and then distributed throughout the empire. At designated temples
across Meluha, trained Brahmins mix it with water and other ingredients to administer it
to the population.’
‘Alright,’ said Shiva.
The Chandravanshis could not become as powerful as us since they never had enough
Somras. Eaten up by their jealousy, they devised a devious way to destroy the Somras
and hence us. One of the key ingredients in the Somras is the waters of the Saraswati.
Water from any other source does not work’ ‘Really? Why?’
We don’t know my Lord. The scientists can’t explain it. But only the waters of the
Saraswati will do. That is why, the Chandravanshis tried to kill the Saraswati to harm
us.’
‘Kill the river?’ asked Shiva incredulously.
‘Yes my Lord!’ said Daksha, as his childlike eyes flared up at the Chandravanshi perfidy.
‘The Saraswati comes from the confluence of two mighty rivers up north — the Sutlej
and the Yamuna. In the olden days, the course of the Sutlej and Yamuna used to be
neutral territory. Both the Chandravanshis and we visited the land to draw waters for the
Somras.’
‘But how did they try to kill the Saraswati your Highness?’
‘They diverted the course of the Yamuna so that instead of flowing south, it started
flowing east to meet their main river, Ganga.’
‘You can do that?’ asked Shiva in amazement. ‘Change the course of a river!’
‘Yes, of course you can,’ answered Parvateshwar.
‘We were livid,’ interjected Daksha. ‘But we still gave them a chance to make amends
for their duplicity’
‘And?’
‘What can you expect from the Chandravanshis,
my Lord?’ said Daksha in disgust.
They denied any knowledge of this. They claimed that the river made such a dramatic
change in its course all by itself, due to some minor earthquake. And even worse, they
claimed that since the river had changed course of its own accord, we Meluhans would
simply have to accept what was essentially God’s will!’
‘We of course refused to do that,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘Under the leadership of King
Brahmanayak, his Highness’ father, we attacked Swadweep.’
‘The land of the Chandravanshis?’
asked Shiva.
‘Yes Shiva,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘And it was a resounding victory. The Chandravanshi
army was routed. King Brahmanayak kindly let them keep their lands and even their
system of governance. We didn’t even ask for any war reparations or yearly tribute
either. The only term of the surrender treaty was the return of the Yamuna. We restored
the Yamuna to her original course to meet with the Saraswati.’
‘You fought in that war, Parvateshwar?’

 ‘Yes,’ said Parvateshwar, his chest swollen with pride. ‘I was a mere soldier then. But I
did fight in that war.’
Turning to Daksha, Shiva asked, ‘Then what is the problem now, your Highness? Your
enemy was comprehensively defeated. Then why is the Saraswati still dying?’
We believe that the Chandravanshis are up to something again. We don’t understand it
as yet. After their defeat, the area between our two countries was made into a no-man’s
land and the jungle has reclaimed it. That included the early course of the Yamuna as
well. We stuck to our part of the bargain and never disturbed that region. It appears that
they didn’t honour their end of the promise.’
‘Are you sure of that your Highness? Has the area been checked? Has this been
discussed with the Chandravanshis’ representative in your empire?’
‘Are you trying to say that we are lying?’ countered Parvateshwar. True Suryavanshis
don’t lie!’
‘Parvateshwar!’ scolded Daksha angrily. ‘The Lord was not implying anything like that.’
‘Listen to me, Parvateshwar,’ said Shiva politely. ‘If I have learnt something from the
poindess batdes of my land, it is that wars should be the last resort. If there is another
solution possible, there is no harm in saving some young soldier’s life. A mother
somewhere would bless us for it.’
‘Let’s not fight! Wonderful! What a great saviour we have!’ Parvateshwar muttered
under his breath.
‘You have something to say Parvateshwar?’ barked Kanakhala. ‘I have told you before.
You will not insult the Neelkanth in my presence!’
‘I don’t take orders from you,’ growled Parvateshwar.
‘Enough!’ ordered Daksha. Turning to Shiva, he continued, ‘I am sorry my Lord. You are
right. We shouldn’t just declare war without being sure. That is why I have avoided a
war till now. But look at the facts of the case. The flow of the Saraswati has been slowly
depleting for the last fifty years.’
‘And the last few years have been horrible,’ said Kanakhala as she controlled her tears
at the slow death of the river most Meluhans regarded as a mother. ‘The Saraswati
doesn’t even reach the sea now and ends in an inland delta just south of Rajasthan.’
‘And the Somras cannot be made without water from the Saraswati,’ continued Daksha.
‘The Chandravanshis know that and that is why they are trying to kill her.’
‘What does the Swadweep representative say about it? Has he been questioned?’
‘We have no diplomatic relations with Swadweep, my Lord,’ said Daksha.
‘Really? I thought having representatives of other countries was one of your innovative
systems. It gives you an opportunity to better understand them and maybe avoid
jumping into a war. I had heard of a diplomatic mission from Mesopotamia coming in
two days ago. Then why not have this with Swadweep as well?’
‘You don’t know them, my Lord. They are untrustworthy people. No follower of the
Suryavanshi way will dirty his soul by even speaking to a Chandravanshi willingly’
Shiva frowned but didn’t say anything.
‘You don’t know the levels they have sunk to my Lord. Over the previous few years they
have even started using the cursed Nagas in their terrorist attacks on us!’ said
Kanakhala, with a disgusted look.
‘Terrorist attacks?’
‘Yes, my Lord,’ said Daksha. Their defeat kept them quiet for many decades. And
because of our overwhelming victory in the previous war, they believe that they cannot
overpower us in an open confrontation. So they have resorted to a form of assault that
only repulsive people like them could turn to. Terrorist attacks.’
‘I didn’t understand. What exactly do they do?’
‘They send small bands of assassins who launch surprise attacks on non-military but
public places. Their idea is to attack non-combatants — the Brahmins, Vaishyas or

 Shudras. They try to devastate places like temples, public baths — areas where there
may not be soldiers to fight back — but whose destruction will wreck the empire’s
morale and spread terror.’
‘That’s disgusting! Even the Pakratis in my land, a bunch of complete barbarians, would
not do that,’ said Shiva.
‘Yes,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘These Chandravanshis
don’t fight like men. They fight like
cowards!’
‘Then why don’t you attack their country? Finish this once and for all.’
‘We would like to my Lord,’ said Daksha. ‘But I am not sure we can defeat them.’
Shiva observed Parvateshwar seething silendy at the insult to his army, before turning
towards Daksha. ‘Why, your Highness? You have a well trained and efficient force. I am
sure your army can defeat them.’
‘Two reasons, my Lord. Firsdy, we are outnumbered. We were outnumbered even a
hundred years back. But not by a very significant margin. But today, we estimate that
they have a population of more than eighty million compared to our eight million. They
can throw a much larger army at us — their sheer numbers will cancel out our
technological superiority.’
‘But why should your population be less? You have people who live beyond the age of
two hundred years! Your population should be higher.’
‘Sociological causes, my Lord,’ said Daksha. ‘Our country is rich. Children are a matter
of choice, more than a duty. Parents would adopt children from the Maika system in
small numbers, may be one or two, so that they could devote more attention on their
upbringing. Fewer and fewer mothers are giving birth at Maika as well. In Swadweep,
for the poor, children are bonded labour to supplement a family’s income. The more
children they have, the less poor the family. So that country as a whole has a far larger
population.’
‘And the second reason for avoiding war?’
The second reason is something that is under our control. We fight with “rules of war”.
With norms and ethics. The Chandravanshis do nothing like that. And I fear that this is a
weakness in us that our ruthless enemies can exploit.’
‘Rules of war?’ asked Shiva.
‘Yes. For example, we will not attack an unarmed man. A superior armed person like a
cavalry man will not attack an inferior armed person like a spear wielding foot-soldier. A
swordsman will never attack a person below his waist because that is unethical. The
Chandravanshis don’t care for such niceties. They will attack whomsoever and however
they find expedient to ensure victory’
‘Begging your pardon, your Highness,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘But that difference is what
makes us who we are. like Lord Ram said, a person’s ethics and character are not
tested in good times. It is only in bad times that a person shows how steadfast he is to
his dharma.’
‘But Parvateshwar,’ sighed Daksha. ‘We are not under attack by people who are as
ethical and decent as us. Our way of life is under assault. If we don’t fight back in any
which way we can, we will lose.’
‘My apologies once again, your Highness,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘I have never said that
we should not fight back. I am eager to attack. I have been asking repeatedly for
permission to declare war on the Chandravanshis. But if we fight without our rules, our
codes, our ethics, then “our way of life” is as good as destroyed. And the
Chandravanshis would have won without even fighting us!’
At the ringing of the prahar town bell, the conversation was halted, as everyone said a
quick prayer. Shiva turned towards the window, wondering if Sati would be dancing
today.
Daksha turned to Shiva expectantly. ‘Do you need to leave my Lord?’

 ‘No, your Highness,’ said Shiva, hiding the pain and confusion he felt inside. ‘I don’t
believe I am expected anywhere at this point of time.’
At this, the smile on Daksha’s face disappeared with his hopes. Shiva continued, ‘If it is
alright with you, your Highness, may we continue our conversation? Perhaps we can
have our lunch a little later.’
‘Of course we may, my Lord,’ smiled Daksha, pulling himself together.
‘I have got the story so far, your Highness. While I can understand your reasons for not
wanting to attack right now, you clearly have a plan, in which my blue throat has some
strange role to play’
‘Yes, we do have a plan, my Lord. I feel that as an emperor, my giving in unthinkingly to
the righteous anger of some of our people will not solve our problem. I believe that the
people of Swadweep themselves are not evil. It is their Chandravanshi rulers and their
way of life that has made them evil. The only way forward for us is to save the
Swadweepans themselves.’
‘Save the Swadweepans?’
asked Shiva, genuinely surprised.
‘Yes, my Lord. Save them from the evil philosophy that infects their soul. Save them
from their treacherous rulers. Save them from their sorry, meaningless existence. And
we can do this by giving them the benefits of the superior Suryavanshi way of life. Once
they become like us, there will be no reason to fight. We will live like brothers. This is
the unfinished task of my father, King Brahmanayak. In fact, it is the unfinished task of
Lord Ram.’
‘That is a big task to take on, your Highness,’ said Shiva. ‘It is sweeping in its kindness
and reason. But it is a very big task. You will need soldiers to defeat their army and
missionaries to bring them to your side. It is not going to be easy.’
‘I agree. There are many in my empire who have concerns about even attacking
Swadweep, and I am putting forth a much bigger challenge to them, of reforming
Swadweep. That is why I did not want to launch this without the Neelkanth, my Lord.’
Shiva remembered his uncle’s words, spoken many years back, in what was almost
another life. Your destiny lies beyond the mountains.
Whether you fulfil it or run away
once again, is up to you .
As Daksha spoke once again, Shiva refocused his attention on him.
‘The problems that we are facing were prophesied, my Lord,’ continued Daksha. ‘Lord
Ram had himself said that any philosophy, no matter how perfect, works only for a finite
period. That is the law of nature and cannot be avoided. But what the legends also tell
us is that when the problems become insurmountable for ordinary men, the Neelkanth
will appear. And that he will destroy the evil Chandravanshis and restore the forces of
good. My Lord, you are the Neelkanth. You can save us. You can complete the
unfinished task of Lord Ram. You must lead us and help us defeat the Chandravanshis.
You must rally the Swadweepans
around to the side of good. Otherwise I fear that this
beautiful country that we have, the near perfect society of Meluha, will be destroyed in
years of endless war. Will you help us my Lord? Will you lead us?’
Shiva was confused. ‘But I didn’t understand, your Highness? What exactly would I do?’
‘I don’t know, my Lord. We only know our destination and that you will be our leader.
The path we take is up to you.’
They want me to destroy the entire way of life of eighty million people by myself! Are
they mad?
Shiva spoke carefully. ‘I empathise with your people and their hardships, your Highness.
But to be quite honest, I don’t really understand how one man like me can make a
difference.’
‘If that man is you my Lord,’ said Daksha, his moist eyes opened wide in devotion and
faith, ‘he can change the entire universe.’
‘I am not so sure of that, your Highness,’ said Shiva with a weak smile. ‘Why will my

 being present make such a difference? I am no miracle worker. I cannot snap my
fingers and cause bolts of lightning to descend on the Chandravanshis.’
‘It is your presence itself that will make the difference, my Lord. I invite you to travel
through the empire. See the effect your blue throat has on the people. Once my people
believe that they can do it, they will be able to do it!’
‘You are the Neelkanth, my Lord,’ added Kanakhala. The people have faith in the bearer
of the blue throat. They will have faith in you. ‘Will you help us, my Lord?’
Will you run away once again?
‘But how do you know that my blue throat makes me the genuine Neelkanth?’ asked
Shiva. ‘For all you know, there may be many Meluhans with a blue throat waiting to be
discovered!’
‘No, my Lord,’ said Daksha. ‘It cannot be a Meluhan. The legend says that the
Neelkanth will be a foreigner. He cannot be from the Sapt-Sindhu. And that he will get a
blue throat on drinking the Somras.’
Shiva did not answer. He looked stunned as truth suddenly dawned upon him.
Srinagar. The first night. Somras. That’s how my body got repaired. That’s why I’m
feeling stronger than ever.
Daksha and Kanakhala looked at Shiva breathlessly, waiting for his decision. Praying
for his right decision.
But why only me? All the Gunas were given the Somras. Was my uncle right? Do I
really have a destiny?
Parvateshwar stared at Shiva with narrowed eyes.
I don’t deserve any destiny. But maybe this is my chance to redeem myself.
But first...
Shiva asked with controlled politeness, ‘Your Highness, before I answer, may I ask you
a question?’
‘Of course, my Lord.’
‘Do you agree that honesty is required to make any friendship work? Even if it means
deeply offending your friend with the truth?’
‘Yes, of course,’ replied Daksha, wondering where Shiva was going with this.
‘Complete honesty is not just the bedrock of an individual relationship, but of any stable
society,’ interjected Parvateshwar.
‘I couldn’t agree more,’ said Shiva. ‘And yet, Meluha wasn’t honest with me.’
Nobody said anything.
Shiva continued in a courteous, but firm tone. ‘When my tribe was being invited to come
to Meluha, we had the impression you wanted immigrants because you needed people
to work. And I was happy to escape my benighted land. But now I realise that you were
systematically searching for the Neelkanth.’
Turning to Nandi, Shiva said, ‘We weren’t told that a medicine called the Somras would
be administered to us as soon as we entered. We weren’t told that the medicine would
have such effects.’
Nandi looked down with guilty eyes. His Lord had the right to be angry with him.
Turning to Daksha, Shiva continued, ‘Your Highness, you know that the Somras was
probably administered to me on my first night in Kashmir, without my knowledge.’
‘I am truly sorry about that dishonesty my Lord,’ said Daksha, with his hands in a
penitent namaste. ‘It’s something that I will always be ashamed of. But the stakes were
too high for us. And the Somras has considerably positive effects on your body. It
doesn’t harm you in any way.’
‘I know. I am not exactly upset about having to live a long and healthy life,’ said Shiva
wryly. ‘Do you know that my tribe was also probably given the Somras that night? And
they fell seriously ill, perhaps because of the Somras.’
‘They were under no risk my Lord,’ said Kanakhala apologetically. ‘Some people are

 predisposed towards certain diseases. When the Somras enters the body, it triggers the
immediate occurrence of these diseases, which when cured, never recur. Hence, the
body remains healthy till death. Your tribe is actually much healthier now.’
‘No doubt they are,’ said Shiva. ‘The point is not about the effects of the Somras. Both
my tribe and I are better for it. Yet, from what I understand of Meluha, getting somebody
to do something without telling him all the facts would not have been Lord Ram’s way.
You should have told us the complete truth at Mount Kailash. Then you should have let
us make an informed choice rather than you making a choice for us. We probably
would still have come to Meluha anyway but then it would have been our choice.’
‘Please forgive us the deception, my Lord,’ said Daksha, with guilty regret. ‘It is not our
way to do something like this. We pride ourselves on our honesty. But we had no
choice. We are truly sorry, my Lord. Your people are well taken care of. They are
healthier than ever. They will live long, productive lives.’
Parvateshwar finally broke his silence, speaking what was always in his heart since the
search had begun many decades ago. ‘Shiva, we are truly sorry for what has been
done. You have every right to be angry. Lying is not our way. I think what was done is
appalling and Lord Ram would have never condoned this. No matter how serious our
troubles, we have no right to deceive someone into helping us. I am deeply sorry’
Shiva raised his eyebrow a bit.
Parvateshwar is the only one apologising instead of making excuses. He is a true
follower of the great king Ram’s way
Shiva smiled.
Daksha let out an audible sigh of relief.
Shiva turned towards Daksha. ‘Let us put this in the past, your Highness. Like I said,
there are some things about your nation that could be improved. No doubt about that.
But it is amongst the best societies that I have seen. And it is worth fighting for. But I
have a few conditions.’
‘Of course, my Lord,’ said Daksha, eager to please.
‘At this point of time, I am not saying that I can perform the tasks that you expect of me
nor am I saying that I cannot do it. All I am saying is that I will try my best. But before
that, I want to understand more of your society before I can be sure of how I can help. I
am assuming that nothing will be hidden from me nor will I be misled.’
‘Of course, my Lord.’
‘Secondly, you still need immigrants to expand your population. But you should not
mislead them. I think that you should tell them the entire truth about Meluha and let
them make an informed decision on whether to come here. Or you don’t invite them at
all. Is that fair?’
‘Of course it is, my Lord,’ said Daksha. Nodding briefly towards Kanakhala, he
committed, ‘We will implement that immediately.’
‘Furthermore, it is clear to me that I am not going back to Kashmir. Can my tribe, the
Gunas, be brought to Devagiri? I would like them to be with me.’
‘Of course, my Lord,’ said Daksha with a quick look at Kanakhala. ‘Instructions will be
sent today itself to bring them to Devagiri.’
‘Also, I would like to visit the location where you manufacture the Somras. I would like to
understand this drink of the gods. Something tells me that it is important to do so.’
‘Of course you may, my Lord,’ said Daksha, his face finally breaking into a nervous
smile. ‘Kanakhala will take you there tomorrow itself. In fact, my family is also scheduled
for a visit there day after tomorrow for a puja at the Brahma temple. Perhaps we could
meet there.’
‘That would be nice,’ said Shiva smiling. Then taking a deep breath he added, ‘And
lastly, I guess that you would like to announce the arrival of the Neelkanth to your
people.’

 Daksha and Kanakhala nodded hesitantly.
‘I would like to request that you don’t do that for now.’
Daksha and Kanakhala’s face fell immediately. Nandi’s eyes were glued to the floor. He
had stopped listening to the conversation. The enormity of his prevarication was tearing
him apart.
‘Your Highness, I have a terrible feeling that when people know I am the Neelkanth,
every action and word of mine will be over-interpreted and over—analysed,’ explained
Shiva. ‘I am afraid that I don’t know enough about your society or my task to be able to
handle that at this point of time.’
‘I understand my Lord,’ said Daksha, willing a broken smile back on his face. You have
my word. Only my immediate staff, my family and the people you allow will know of the
Neelkanth’s arrival. Nobody else.’
‘Thank you, your Highness. But I will say it again: I am a simple tribal man who just
happened to get a blue throat because of some exotic medicine. Honesdy, I still don’t
know what one man like me can do in the face of the odds that you face.’
‘And I’ll say it again my Lord,’ said Daksha, with a child-like smile. ‘If that man is you, he
can change the entire universe!’

  
CHAPTER 8
Drink of the Gods
 
Shiva and Nandi were walking back to the royal guest house. Shiva had decided he
wanted to eat lunch alone. Nandi walked a few steps behind, his head bowed in selfrecrimination. ‘My Lord, I am so sorry’
Shiva turned around to gaze at Nandi.
‘You are right, my Lord. We were so lost in our own troubles and the search for the
Neelkanth that we didn’t realise the unfairness of our actions on immigrants. I misled
you my Lord. I lied to you.’
Shiva didn’t say anything. He continued to stare intensely into Nandi’s eyes.
‘I am so sorry my Lord. I have failed you. I will accept whatever punishment you give
me.’
Shiva’s lips broke into a very faint smile. He patted Nandi lightly on his shoulders,
signalling he had forgiven him. But his eyes delivered a clear message. ‘Never lie to me
again, my friend.’
Nandi nodded and whispered, ‘Never, my Lord. I am so sorry’
‘Forget it Nandi,’ said Shiva, his smile a little broader now. ‘It’s in the past.’
They turned and continued walking. Suddenly Shiva shook his head and chuckled
slighdy. ‘Strange people!’
‘What is it, my Lord?’ asked Nandi.
‘Nothing really. I was just wondering at some of the interesting things about your
society.’
‘Interesting, my Lord?’ asked Nandi, feeling a little more confident now that Shiva was
speaking to him again.
‘Well, some people in your country think just the presence of my blue throat can help
you achieve impossible tasks. Some people actually think that my name has suddenly
become so holy that they can’t even speak it.’
Nandi smiled slightly.
‘On the other hand,’ continued Shiva, ‘some people clearly think that I am not required.
In fact, they even think that my touching them is so polluting that I need to get a
shudhikaran done!’
‘Shudhikaran? Why would you need that my Lord?’ asked Nandi, a little concerned.
Shiva weighed his words carefully. ‘Well, I touched someone. And I was told that I
would need to undergo a shudhikaran.’
‘What? Who did you touch my Lord? Was it a vikarma person?’ asked a troubled Nandi.
‘Only the touch of a vikarma person would mean that you would need to get a
shudhikaran.’
Shiva’s face abruptly changed colour. A veil lifted from his eyes. He suddenly
understood the significance of the events of the previous day. Her hasty withdrawal at
being touched. The shocked reactions from the Guruji and Krittika.
‘Go back to the guest house, Nandi. I will see you there,’ said Shiva, as he turned
towards the guest house garden.
‘My Lord, what happened?’ asked Nandi, trying to keep pace with Shiva. ‘Did you get
the shudhikaran done or not?’
‘Go to the guest house Nandi,’ said Shiva walking rapidly away. ‘I will see you there.’

  
Shiva waited for the larger part of an hour. But it was in vain, for Sati did not make an
appearance. He sat on the bench by himself, cursing the moment when that terrible
thought had entered his mind.
How could I have even thought that Sati would find my touch polluting? I am such a
bloody idiot!
He replayed moments of that fateful encounter in his mind and analysed every facet of
it.
‘If something happened to you, I would never be able to forgive myself.’
What did she mean by saying that? Does she have feelings for me? Or is she just an
honourable woman who can’t bear to be the cause of someone else’s misfortune? And
why should she think of herself as inferior? This entire concept of the vikarma is so
damned ridiculous!
Realising that she wasn’t going to come, Shiva got up. He kicked the bench hard,
getting a painful reminder that his once numb toe had got its sensation back. Cursing
out loud, he started walking back to the guest house. Walking past the stage, he noticed
that there was something lying on the dance floor. He went closer and bent down to pick
it up. It was her bead bracelet. He had seen it on her right hand. The string did not seem
broken.
Had she purposely dropped it here?
He smelt it. It had the fragrance of the holy lake on a sun-kissed evening. He brought it
delicately to his lips and kissed it gently. Smiling, he dropped the bracelet into the pouch
tied around his waist. He would come back from Mount Mandar and meet her. He had
to meet her. He would pursue her to the end of the world if required. He would fight the
entire human race to have her. His journey in this life was incomplete without her. His
heart knew it. His soul knew it.

 
‘How much further is it, Madam Prime Minister?’ asked Nandi, behaving like an excited
child.
A visit to the mythical Mount Mandar, the hub where the drink of the gods was
manufactured, was a rare honour for any Meluhan. For most Suryavanshis,
Mount
Mandar was the soul of their empire, for as long as it was safe, so was the Somras.
‘It’s only been an hour since we left Devagiri, Captain,’ said Kanakhala smiling. ‘It’s a
day’s journey to Mount Mandar.’
‘Actually because of the blinds on the carriage windows, I can’t see anything outside.
And I can’t tell how much time has gone by since I can’t see the Sun either. That’s why I
was asking’
‘The prahar lamp is right behind you, Captain. The blinds are down for your own
protection.’
Shiva smiled at Kanakhala. He could understand that the blinds were not for their
protection, but for the safety of Mount Mandar. To keep its location secret. Very few
people knew of its exact location. There was an elite team of soldiers called the
Arishtanemi who protected the road to Mount Mandar and the travellers on it. Except for
the scientists of Mount Mandar, the Arishtanemi and any person authorised by the
Emperor, nobody was allowed to the mountain or to know its location. If the
Chandravanshi terrorists attacked Mount Mandar, all would be lost for Meluha.
‘Who would we be meeting there, Kanakhala?’ asked Shiva.

 ‘My Lord, we would be meeting Brahaspati. He is the Chief Scientist of the empire. He
leads the team of scientists who manufacture the Somras for the entire country. Of
course, they also conduct research in many other fields. A bird courier has already been
sent to him informing him of your arrival. We will be meeting him tomorrow morning.’
‘Shiva nodded slightly, smiled at Kanakhala, and said, Thank you.’
As Nandi looked at the prahar lamp again, Shiva went back to his book. It was an
interesting manuscript about the terrible war that was fought many thousands of years
ago, between the Devas , the gods ; and the Asuras , the demons
— an eternal
struggle between opposites: good and evil. The Devas, with the help of Lord Rudra, the
Mahadev , the God of Gods , had destroyed the Asuras and established righteousness
in the world again.

 
‘I hope you slept well, my Lord,’ said Kanakhala as she welcomed Shiva and Nandi into
the chamber outside Brahaspati’s office.
It was the beginning of the last hour of the first prahar. Days began early at Mount
Mandar.
‘Yes, I did,’ said Shiva. Though there was a strange rhythmic sound on through the
night’
Kanakhala smiled but did not offer any explanation. She bowed her head and opened
the door to let Shiva into Brahaspati’s office. Shiva walked in followed by Kanakhala and
Nandi. There were various strange instruments spread throughout Brahaspati’s large
office, neatly organised on tables of different heights. There were palm leaf notes
alongside each of the instruments where some experiments
had clearly been
conducted. The room was a restrained blue. There was a large picture window in the
corner which afforded a breathtaking view of the dense forest at the foot of the
mountain. At the centre, many simple, low seats had been arranged together in a
square. It was a frugal room, in line with a culture that celebrated simplicity over style at
every turn.
Brahaspati was standing in the centre of the room, his hands folded in a namaste. Of
medium height, much shorter than Shiva, his wheat-coloured skin, deep set eyes and
well-manicured beard gave Brahaspati a distinguished appearance.
A clean shaven
head, except for the choti and a serene expression, gave his face an intellectual look.
His body was slightly overweight. His broad shoulders and barrel chest would have
been markedly pronounced if they had been exercised a bit, but Brahaspati’s body was
a vehicle for his intellect and not the temple that it is to a warrior or Kshatriya.
Brahaspati wore a typical white cotton dhoti and an angvastram draped loosely over his
shoulders. He wore a janau tied from his left shoulder down to the right side of his hips.
‘How are you Kanakhala?’ asked Brahaspati. ‘It has been a long time.’
‘Yes it has, Brahaspati,’ said Kanakhala, greeting Brahaspati with a namaste and a low
bow.
Shiva noticed that the second amulet on Brahaspati’s arm showed him as a swan. A
very select chosen-tribe among Brahmins.
‘This is Lord Shiva,’ said Kanakhala, pointing towards Shiva.
‘Just Shiva will do, thank you,’ smiled Shiva, with a polite namaste towards Brahaspati.
‘Alright then. Just Shiva it is. And, who might you be?’ asked Brahaspati, turning
towards Nandi.
‘This is Captain Nandi,’ answered Kanakhala. ‘Lord Shiva’s aide.’
‘A pleasure to meet you, Captain,’ said Brahaspati, before turning back to Shiva. ‘I don’t
mean to sound rude Shiva. But would it be possible for me to see your throat’
Shiva nodded. As he took off his cravat, Brahaspati came forward to examine the throat.

 His smile disappeared as he saw Shiva’s throat radiating a bright blue hue. Brahaspati
was speechless
for a few moments. Slowly gathering his wits, he turned towards
Kanakhala. ‘This is not a fraud. The colour comes from the inside. How is this possible?
This means that...’
‘Yes,’ said Kanakhala softly, with a happiness that seemed to emanate from deep
inside. ‘It means the Neelkanth has come. Our saviour has come.’
‘Well, I don’t know if I am a saviour or anything like that,’ said an embarrassed Shiva,
retying the cravat around his throat. ‘But I will certainly try my best to help your
wonderful country. It is for this reason that I come to you. Something tells me that it is
important for me to know how the Somras works.’
Brahaspati still seemed to be in a daze. He continued to watch Shiva but his attention
seemed elsewhere. He appeared to be working out the implications of the true
Neelkanth’s arrival.
‘Brahaspati...’ said Kanakhala, as she tried to call the chief scientist back into the here
and now.
‘Huh!’
‘Can you tell me how the Somras works, Brahaspati?’ asked Shiva again.
‘Of course,’ said Brahaspati, as his eyes refocused on the people in front of him.
Noticing Nandi he asked, ‘Is it alright to speak in front of the captain?’
‘Nandi has been my friend through my time in Meluha,’ said Shiva. ‘I hope it is alright if
he stays here.’
Nandi felt touched that his Lord still trusted him so openly. Nandi swore once again, on
pain of death, to never lie to his Lord.
‘Whatever you say, Shiva,’ said Brahaspati, smiling warmly.
Shiva noticed that Brahaspati was not submissive or excessively
deferential on
discovering that he was
the Neelkanth. Just like Parvateshwar,
Brahaspati called
Shiva by his name and not ‘My Lord’. However, Shiva felt that while Parvateshwar’s
attitude was driven by a distrusting surliness, Brahaspati’s was driven perhaps by an
assured affability.
‘Thank you,’ smiled Shiva. ‘So, how does the Somras work?’

 
The royal procession moved slowly on the road to Mount Mandar. There was a pilot
guard of one hundred and sixty cavalrymen who rode before the five royal carriages in
columns of four abreast. A rearguard of another one hundred and sixty rode behind the
royal carriages, in a similar formation. A side guard of forty each marched along the left
and right flanks. Each carriage also had ten soldiers and five serving maids seated on
the side supports. The soldiers were the legendary Arishtanemi, the most feared militia
in all of India.
The five carriages were made of solid wood, with no windows or apertures, except for
upward pointed slits at the top for ventilation. There was a grill in front, behind the rider,
to allow in light and air and this could be shut instantly in case of an attack. All the
carriages were of exactly the same dimension and appearance, making it impossible to
say which carriage carried the royal family. If a person had divyadrishti,
divine vision , to
look beyond what human eyes could see, he would observe that the first, third and
fourth carriages were empty. The second carried the royal family — Daksha, his wife
Veerini and his daughter Sati. The last carriage carried Parvateshwar and some of his
key brigadiers.
‘Father, I still don’t understand why you insist on taking me along to pujas. I am not
even allowed to attend the main ceremony,’ said Sati.
‘I have told you many times before,’ smiled Daksha, as he patted Sati’s hand fondly.

 ‘None of my pujas are complete and pure till I have seen your face. I don’t care about
the damned law.’
‘Father!’ whispered Sati with an embarrassed smile and a slight, reproachful shake of
her head. She knew it was wrong of her father to insult the law.
Sati’s mother, Veerini, looked at Daksha with an awkward smile. Then taking a quick
look at Sati, returned to her book.
At a short distance from the royal procession, hidden by the dense forest, a small band
of fifty soldiers slunk along silently. The soldiers wore light leather armour on their torso
and had their dhotis tied in military style to ensure ease of movement. Each of them
bore two swords, a long knife and had a hardshield made of metal and leather tied
loosely around their back. Their shoes had grooves to hold three small knives. At the
head were two men. One of them, a handsome young man with a battle scar
embellishing his face, wore a dark brown turban which signified that he was the captain.
His leather armour had been tied a little loose and a gold chain and pendant had slipped
out carelessly.
The pendant had a beautiful, white representation of a horizontal
crescent moon, the Chandravanshi symbol.
Next to him walked a giant of a man covered in a long robe from head to toe. A hood
stitched onto the robe was pulled up while his face was covered with a black mask. Very
Ettle of him was visible except for his strong fleshy hands and his expressionless,
almond-shaped eyes. He had a leather bracelet tied to his right wrist with the serpent
Aum symbol embroidered on it. Without turning to the captain, the hooded figure said,
‘Vishwadyumna, your mark is visible. Put it in and tighten your armour.’
An embarrassed Vishwadyumna immediately pushed the chain inside and puEed the
two strings on the side of his shoulder to tighten the breastplate.
‘My Lord, begging your pardon,’ said Vishwadyumna. ‘But perhaps we could move
ahead to confirm that this is the route to Mount Mandar. Once we know that, we’ll be
sure that our informant was correct. I am sure that we can come back to kidnap her
later. We are dangerously outnumbered in any case. We can’t do anything right now.’
The hooded figure replied calmly, ‘Vishwadyumna, have I ordered an attack? Where
does the question of us being outnumbered come in? And we are going in the direction
of Mount Mandar. A few hours delay will not bring the heavens down. For now, we
follow.’
Vishwadyumna swallowed hard. There was nothing he hated more than opposing his
lord’s views. After all, it was his lord who had found the rare Suryavanshi sympathetic to
their cause. This breakthrough would make it possible for them to rip out and destroy
the very heart of Meluha. He spoke softly, ‘But my Lord, you know the Queen doesn’t
like delays. There is unrest brewing amongst the men that perhaps the focus is being
lost.’
The hooded figure turned sharply. His body seemed to convey anger but his voice was
composed. ‘I am not losing focus. If you want to leave, please go. You will get your
money. I will do this alone if I have to.’
Shocked to see the rare show of emotion on his leader, Vishwadyumna retracted
immediately. ‘No, my Lord. That is not what I was trying to imply. I am sorry. I will stay
with you till you release me. You are right. A few hours will make no difference when we
have waited for centuries.’
The platoon continued tracking the royal caravan silendy.

 
‘At a conceptual level, how the Somras works is ridiculously simple,’ said Brahaspati.
‘The almost impossible task was to convert the concept into reality. That was the genius
of Lord Brahma. Jai Shri Brahma!’

 ‘Jai Shri Brahma,’ repeated Shiva, Kanakhala and Nandi.
‘Before understanding how the medicine slows down the ageing process dramatically,
we have to understand what keeps us alive,’ said Brahaspati. ‘There is a fundamental
thing that none of us can live without.’
Shiva stared at Brahaspati, waiting for him to expound.
‘And that fundamental thing is energy,’ explained Brahaspati. ‘When we walk, talk, think,
that is when we do anything that can be called being alive, we use energy.’
‘We have a similar concept amongst our people,’ said Shiva. ‘Except, we call it Shakti.’
‘Shakti?’ asked a surprised Brahaspati. ‘Interesting. That word has not been used to
describe energy for many centuries. It was a term of the Pandyas, the ancestors of all
the people of India. Do you know where your tribe came from? Their lineage?’
‘I am not really sure but there is an old woman in my tribe who claims to know
everything about our history. Perhaps we should ask her when she comes to Devagiri.’
‘Perhaps we should!’ smiled Brahaspati. ‘In any case, getting back to the subject, we
know nothing can be done by our body without energy. Now where does this energy
come from?’
‘From the food that we eat?’ suggested Nandi, timidly. He was finally getting the
confidence to speak in front of such important people.
‘Absolutely right. The food that we eat stores energy, which we can expend. That’s also
why if we don’t eat, we feel weak. However, you don’t get energy just by eating food.
Something inside the body has to draw the energy so that we can put it to good use.’
‘Absolutely,’ agreed Shiva.
‘The conversion of food into energy is done by the air we breathe,’ continued
Brahaspati. ‘The air has various gases in it. One of these gases is called oxygen, which
reacts with our food and releases energy. If we don’t get oxygen, our body would be
starved of energy and we would die.’
‘But this is the process that keeps us alive,’ said Shiva. ‘What does the medicine have
to do with it? The medicine has to work on that which causes us to grow old, become
weaker and die.’
Brahaspati smiled. ‘What I told you does have something to do with how we age.
Because as it appears, nature has a sense of humour. The very thing that keeps us
alive is also what causes us to age and eventually die. When oxygen reacts with our
food to release energy, it also releases free radicals called oxidants. These oxidants are
toxic as well. When you leave any fruit out and it goes bad, it’s because it has been
“oxidised” or the oxidants have reacted with it to make it rot. A similar “oxidising
process” causes metals to corrode. It happens especially with the new metal we have
discovered — iron. The same thing happens to our body when we breathe in oxygen.
The oxygen helps convert the food we eat into energy. But it also causes the release of
oxidants into our body which start reacting inside us. We rust from the inside out, and
hence age and die.’
‘By the holy god Agni!’ exclaimed Nandi. ‘The very thing that gives us life also slowly
kills us?’
‘Yes,’ said Brahaspati. ‘Think about it. The body tries to store everything that you need
from the outside world to survive. It stores enough food so that even if you don’t eat for
a few days you won’t die. It stocks up on water so that a few days of thirst will not kill
you. It seems logical, right? If your body needs something, it keeps some of it as backup
for possible shortages.’
‘Absolutely,’ agreed Shiva.
‘On the other hand, the body does not store enough oxygen, the most crucial
component of staying alive, to last for more than just a few minutes. It doesn’t make
sense at all. The only explanation can be that the body realises that despite being an
elixir, oxygen is also a poison. Hence it is dangerous to store.’

 ‘So, what did Lord Brahma do?’ asked Shiva.
‘After a lot of research, Lord Brahma invented the Somras, which when consumed,
reacts with the oxidants, absorbs them and then expels them from the body as sweat or
urine. Because of the Somras, there are no oxidants left in the body’
‘Is that why the sweat released from the body is poisonous the first time after a person
drinks the Somras?’
‘Yes. Your sweat is particularly dangerous the first time after you drink the Somras.
Having said that, remember, sweat and urine released from the body even after a
person has drunk the Somras for years remains toxic. So you have to eject it from the
body and make sure that it does not affect anyone else.’
‘So, that’s why the Meluhans are so obsessed with hygiene.’
‘Yes. That’s why all Meluhans are taught about two things from a young age — water
and hygiene. Water is the cleanest absorber of the effluents that the Somras generates
and excretes as toxins. Meluhans are taught to drink gallons of water. And everything
that can be washed, should be washed! The Meluhans bathe at least twice a day. All
ablutions are done in specific rooms and the waste is carried out by underground drains
safely out of the city’
‘Strict hygiene standards!’ smiled Shiva, as he remembered his first day in Kashmir and
Ayurvati’s strong words. ‘What goes into manufacturing the Somras?’
‘Manufacturing the Somras is not without its fair share of difficulties. It requires various
ingredients that are not easily available. For example, the Sanjeevani tree. The empire
has giant plantations to produce these trees. The manufacturing procedure also
generates a lot of heat. So we have to use a lot of water during the processing to keep
the mixture stable. Also, the crushed branches of the Sanjeevani tree have to be
churned with the waters of the Saraswati river before processing begins. Water from
other sources doesn’t work’
‘Is that the strange noise I keep hearing: the churners?’
‘That’s exacty what it is. We have giant churning machines in a massive cavern at the
base of this mountain. The Saraswati waters are led in here through a complex system
of canals. The water is collected in an enormous pool in the cavern which we
affectionately call Sagar.’
‘Sagar An ocean
You call a pool of water by that name?’ asked a surprised Shiva, for
he had heard legends about the massive, never-ending expanse of water called Sagar.
‘It is a bit of hyperbole,’ admitted Brahaspati with a smile. ‘But if you did see the size of
the pool, you would realise that we are not that off the mark!’
‘Well I would certainly like to see the entire facility. It was too late when we came in last
night so I haven’t seen much of the mountain as yet.’
‘I will take you around after lunch,’ said Brahaspati.
Shiva grinned in reply. He was about to say something, but checked himself in time,
looking at both Kanakhala and Nandi.
Brahaspati noticed the hesitation. He felt Shiva might want to ask him something, but
not in front of Nandi and Kanakhala. Brahaspati turned to them and said, ‘I think Shiva
wants to ask me something. May I request you to wait outside?’
It was a measure of the respect that Brahaspati commanded, that Kanakhala
immediately rose to leave the room after a formal namaste, followed by Nandi.
Brahaspati turned to Shiva with a smile. ‘Why don’t you ask me the real question you
came to ask?’

  
CHAPTER 9
Love and its Consequences
 
‘I didn’t want to question you in front of them. Their faith is overwhelming,’ explained
Shiva with a wry grin. He was beginning to like Brahaspati. He enjoyed being around a
man who treated him like an equal.
Brahaspati nodded. ‘I understand, my friend. What do you want to ask?’
‘Why me?’ asked Shiva. Why did the Somras have this strange effect on me? I might
have a blue throat, but I don’t know how I am going to become the saviour of the
Suryavanshis.
The Emperor tells me that I am supposed to be the one who will
complete Lord Ram’s unfinished work and destroy the Chandravanshis.’
‘He told you that?’ asked Brahaspati, his eyes wide in surprise. ‘The Emperor can be a
little tiresome at times. But suffice it to say that what he told you is not completely
correct. The legend doesn’t exactly say that the Neelkanth will save the Suryavanshis.
The legend says two things. First, that the Neelkanth will not be from the Sapt-Sindhu.
And second, the Neelkanth will be the “destroyer of evil”. The Meluhans believe that this
implies that the Neelkanth will destroy the Chandravanshis,
since they are obviously
evil. But destroying the Chandravanshis
doesn’t mean that the Suryavanshis will be
saved! There are many other problems, besides the Chandravanshis,
that we need to
solve.’
‘What kind of problems? Like the Nagas?’
Brahaspati seemed to hesitate for a moment. He replied carefully. ‘There are many
problems. We are working hard to solve them. But coming back to your question, why
did the Somras have this effect on you?’
‘Yes, why did it? Why did my throat turn blue? Forget about stopping the degeneration
of my body, the Somras actually repaired a dislocated shoulder and a frostbitten toe.’
‘It repaired an injury?’ asked an incredulous Brahaspati. ‘That’s impossible! It is just
supposed to prevent diseases and ageing, not repair injuries.’
‘Well, it did in my case.’
Brahaspati thought for a bit. ‘We will have to do experiments to come up with a definitive
answer. For now though, I can think of only one explanation. From what I know, you
come from the high lands beyond the Himalayas, right?’
Shiva nodded.
‘The air gets thinner as you go higher up the mountains,’ continued Brahaspati. ‘There
is less oxygen in thinner air. That means your body was used to surviving with less
oxygen and resultantiy was less harmed by the oxidants. Therefore the anti-oxidants in
the Somras may have had a stronger effect on you.’
‘That could be one of the reasons,’ agreed Shiva. ‘But if that was the case, the rest of
my tribe should have also turned cold and blue. Why just me?’
‘A good point,’ conceded Brahaspati. ‘But tell me one thing. Did your tribe also
experience an improvement in their pre—existing conditions?’
‘Actually, yes they did.’
‘So maybe the diluted air you all lived in did have some role to play. But since all of your
tribe did not develop blue throats, it is obvious that the “thinner air” theory may be a
partial explanation. We can always research it more. I am sure there is a scientific
explanation for the blue throat.’
Shiva looked at Brahaspati intently, as he read between the lines of Brahaspati’s last

 statement. ‘You don’t believe in the legend of the Neelkanth, do you?’
Brahaspati smiled at Shiva awkwardly. He was beginning to like Shiva and did not want
to say anything to insult him. But he wasn’t going to lie either. ‘I believe in science. It
provides a solution and a rationale for everything. And if there is anything that appears
like a miracle, the only explanation is that a scientific reason for it has not been
discovered as yet.’
‘Then why do the people of Meluha not look to science for solving their problems?’
‘I am not sure,’ said Brahaspati thoughtfully. ‘Perhaps it is because science is a capable
but cold-hearted master. Unlike a Neelkanth, it will not solve your problems for you. It
will only provide you the tools that you may need to fight your own battles. Perhaps it is
easier for people to believe that someone else will come and solve their problems rather
than solve it themselves.’
‘So what do you think is the role that the Neelkanth has to play in Meluha?’
Brahaspati looked at Shiva sympathetically. ‘I would like to think that true Suryavanshis
should fight their own demons rather than put pressure on someone else and expect
him to solve their problems. A true Suryavanshi’s
duty is to push himself to the limit of
his abilities and strength. The coming of the Neelkanth should only redouble a
Suryavanshi’s efforts, since it is obvious that the time for the destruction of evil is near.’
Shiva nodded.
‘Are you concerned that it may be too much of a strain for you to take up a responsibility
that you don’t really want, because of the pressure of faith?’ asked Brahaspati.
‘No, that is not my concern,’ replied Shiva. This is a wonderful country and I certainly
want to do all I can to help. But what if your people depend on me to protect them and I
can’t? Right now, I can’t say that I can do all that is expected from me. So how can I
give my word?’
Brahaspati smiled. According to his rule book, any man who took his own word
seriously was worth respecting.
‘You appear to be a good man, Shiva. You will probably face a lot of pressure in the
coming days. Be careful, my friend. Because of the blue throat and the blind faith it
generates,
your decisions will have ramifications for the entire land. Remember,
whether a man is a legend or not is decided by history, not fortune-tellers.’
Shiva smiled, glad to have finally found a man who understood his predicament. And
more importantly, was willing to at least offer some advice.

 
It was late in the evening. Having spent a thoroughly enjoyable afternoon on a detailed
tour of Mount Mandar with Brahaspati, Shiva lay on his bed, reading a book. A spent
chillum lay on the side table.
A few aspects of the story he was reading, ‘The Righteous War against the Asuras’,
troubled him. The Asuras were demons and were expected to behave like demons,
having a pathological hatred for the Devas. They routinely attacked Deva cities, trying to
force them to accept the Asura way of life. This was not a surprise to Shiva. What was
unexpected though was the way some of the Devas behaved, going to unusually
unethical limits in their blind pursuit of victory. Lord Rudra, though personally a great
man, seemed to ignore the indiscretions of the Devas in the interest of the larger good.
Shiva heard a commotion outside the Guest House. He looked out of his first floor
balcony to notice that the royal caravan had just arrived. The Arishtanemi soldiers had
formed a neat salutary row at the entrance. Some people appeared to be disembarking
from the far side of the second carriage. Shiva assumed it must be the royal family. The
surprise was that the Arishtanemi seemed to be going through just the normal motions
in receiving the royal family. There wasn’t the usual servitude that would be expected in

 front of royalty. Shiva suspected that this could be due to the usual Meluhan obsession
with perceived equality.
However, Shiva’s equality theory was challenged when he looked at the fifth carriage
from which Parvateshwar alit. Here, the Arishtanemi seemed to be in a tizzy. The senior
captain rushed in front of Parvateshwar and executed a Meluhan military salute — a
quick click of the heels, the body rigid in attention and the right hand, balled in a fist,
brought rapidly and violently to his left chest. After this salute, the captain bent low in
respect to the chief of the army. The soldiers at the back repeated their captain’s
greeting. Parvateshwar formally saluted in return, accompanied with a slight bow of his
head.
He started towards his soldiers, inspecting them, while the captain politely fell two steps
behind.
Shiva had a feeling that the admiration reserved for Parvateshwar was not because of
the post he held. It was for the man himself. For all his surliness, Parvateshwar had a
reputation of a brave warrior, a soldier’s general respected as a man whose word was
true. Shiva could see the strength of that repute in the eyes of each Arishtanemi who
bent low on receiving the attention of his general.
A little while later, Shiva heard a soft knock on his door. He did not need to open it to
know who was on the other side. Sighing sofdy, he opened the door.
Daksha’s fixed smile disappeared and he started a litde as the unfamiliar odour of the
marijuana assaulted his senses. Kanakhala, standing to the Emperor’s right, appeared
equally perplexed.
‘What is that stench?’ Daksha asked Brahaspati, who stood to the left. ‘Perhaps you
should change the Lord’s room. How can you subject him to this discomfort?’
‘I have a feeling that Shiva is comfortable with this aroma, your Highness,’ said
Brahaspati.
‘It is a smell that travels with me, your Highness,’ said Shiva. ‘I like it.’
Daksha was baffled. His face did nothing to hide his revulsion. But he quickly recovered
his composure. After all, the Lord was happy with the malodour. ‘I’m sorry to disturb
you, my Lord,’ said Daksha, his smile back in place. ‘I had just thought I would inform
you that my family and I have reached the guest house.’
‘It’s very kind of you to inform me, your Highness,’ said Shiva with a formal namaste.
‘My family and I were hoping to have the honour of eating breakfast with you tomorrow
morning, my Lord.’
‘The honour would be mine, your Highness.’
‘Excellent. Excellent,’ beamed Daksha as he moved on to the question that dominated
his mind. ‘What do you think of the Somras, my Lord? Isn’t it really the drink of the
Gods?’
‘Yes your Highness. It does appear to be a miraculous drink.’
‘It is the basis of our civilisation,’ continued Daksha. ‘Once you have taken a tour of our
land, you will see the goodness of our way of life. I am sure you will find it in your heart
to do something to save it.’
‘Your Highness, I already think highly of your country. It truly is great and treats its
citizens well. I wouldn’t doubt that it is a way of life that is worth protecting. However,
what I am not sure about is what I can do. Yours is such an advanced civilisation and I
am just a simple tribal man.’
‘Faith is a very potent weapon, my Lord,’ said Daksha, his hands joined in supplication.
‘All that is needed is for you to have as much faith in yourself as we have in you. I am
sure that if you spend a few more days in our country and see the effect that your
presence has on our people, you will realise what you can do.’
Shiva gave up arguing against Daksha’s childlike belief.
Brahaspati winked at Shiva before coming to his rescue. ‘Your Highness, Shiva looks

 tired to me. It has been a long day. Maybe he should retire and we could meet
tomorrow?’
Daksha smiled, ‘Perhaps you are right, Brahaspati. My apologies for troubling you, my
Lord. We will see you at breakfast. Have a good night.’
‘Good night,’ wished Shiva in return.

 
Sati waited quietly at the table as Daksha glanced nervously at the prahar lamp. To the
left were Kanakhala, Brahaspati and Parvateshwar. To his right was an empty chair. For
the ‘Neelkanth’, thought Sati. Next to the empty chair sat Sati and to her right was her
mother, Veerini. Daksha had agonised deeply over the seating to get it exactly right.
Sati looked over the arrangements. A formal table and chairs for breakfast rather than
the preferred low table and floor cushions that Meluhans normally sat upon to eat. The
beloved banana leaf had been replaced by gold plates. The taste enhancing kulhads ,
or mud cups , had been replaced by refined silver glasses. She thought that her father
was really pulling out all stops for this breakfast meeting. She had seen him pin his
hopes on too many so-called Neelkanths earlier. Miracle men who had turned out to be
frauds. She hoped that her father would not have to face disillusionment again.
The crier announced Shiva and Nandi. As Daksha rose with a reverential namaste to
receive the Lord, Parvateshwar rolled his eyes at the servile behaviour of his Emperor.
At the same instant, Sati bent down to pick up a glass that she had accidentally
knocked over to the floor.
‘My Lord,’ said Daksha pointing to the people standing around the table. ‘Kanakhala,
Brahaspati and Parvateshwar, you already know. At the far right is my wife, Queen
Veerini.’
Shiva smiled politely as he returned Veerini’s namaste with a formal namaste and a low
bow.
‘And next to her,’ said Daksha with a broad smile as Sati came up holding the glass she
had retrieved, ‘is my daughter, Princess Sati.’
The breath went out of Shiva as he looked at his life staring back at him. His heart beat
a frantic rhythm. He could swear that he had a whiff of his favourite fragrance in the
world: the aroma of the holy lake at sunset. As before, he was mesmerized.
There was an uncomfortable silence in the room. Except for the noise made by the
unfortunate glass which fell from Sati’s hand again. The clang of the rolling glass
distracted Sati slightly from her fixed gaze. With superhuman effort, she managed to
control the look of shock on her face. She was breathing heavily, as if she had just
danced a duet with Shiva. What she did not know was that her soul was doing exactly
that.
Daksha gazed at the dumbstruck couple with glee. He had the look of a director who
had just seen his play being perfectly executed. Nandi, standing right behind Shiva,
could see Sati’s expression. Suddenly everything became clear to him. The dance
practices, the vikarma touch, the shudhikaran and his Lord’s anguish. While some part
of him was afraid, another reconciled to it quickly. If his Lord wanted this, he would
support it in every way possible. Brahaspati stared blankly at the couple, deep in
thought about the implications of this unexpected situation. Parvateshwar looked at the
goings on with barely concealed repugnance. What was happening was wrong, immoral
and worst of all, illegal.
‘My Lord,’ said Daksha pointing to the empty seat at his right. ‘Please take your seat
and we shall begin.’
Shiva did not react. He had not heard Daksha’s words. He was in a world where the
only sound was the harmonious melody of Sati’s heavy breathing. A tune he could

 blissfully dance to for his next seven lives.
‘My Lord,’ repeated Daksha, a litde louder.
A distracted Shiva finally looked at Daksha, as if from another world.
‘Please take your seat, my Lord,’ said Daksha.
‘Yes of course, your Highness,’ said Shiva averting his eyes in embarrassment.
As Shiva sat down, the food was brought in. It was a simple delicacy that the Meluhans
loved for breakfast. Rice and some cereals fermented and ground into a thick batter.
Small portions of this batter were then wrapped in banana leaves and steamed into
cylindrical roundels. The preparation was served while still draped in the banana leaf,
along with some spicy lentils for taste. The dish was called an idli.
‘You’re the Neelkanth?’ a still shocked Sati whispered softly to Shiva, as she had willed
some calmness into her breathing.
‘Apparently so,’ replied Shiva with a playful grin. ‘Impressed?’
Sati answered that question with a raised disdainful brow. The mask was back. ‘Why
would I be impressed?’
What?!
‘My Lord,’ said Daksha.
‘Yes, your Highness,’ said Shiva, turning towards Daksha.
‘I was thinking,’ said Daksha. ‘Our puja should be over by this evening. Yet I have to
stay here for two more days for some reviews with Brahaspati. There is no point in
having Veerini and Sati get thoroughly bored out here for so much time.’
‘Thank you, your Highness,’ said Brahaspati with a sly grin. ‘Your vote of confidence in
the interest that the royal family has in Mount Mandar is most reassuring.’
The entire table burst out laughing. So did Daksha, exhibiting a sporting spirit.
‘You know what I meant Brahaspati!’ said Daksha, shaking his head. Turning back to
Shiva, he continued, ‘From what I know, my Lord, you were planning to leave for
Devagiri tomorrow morning. I think it may be a good idea for Veerini and Sati to
accompany you. The rest of us can catch up with you two days later.’
Sati looked up in alarm. She wasn’t sure why, but something told her that she shouldn’t
agree to this plan. Another part of her said that she had no reason to be scared. In all
the eighty-five years she had spent as a vikarma, she had never broken the law. She
had the self-control to know what was right, and what wasn’t.
Shiva though had no such thoughts. With very obvious delight, he said, ‘I think that is a
very good idea, your Highness. Nandi and I could travel with both her Highnesses back
to Devagiri.’
‘It’s settled then,’ said a visibly content Daksha. Turning to Parvateshwar,
he said,
‘Parvateshwar, please ensure that the Arishtanemi escort are broken up into two groups
for the return journey.’
‘My Lord, I don’t think that is wise,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘A large part of the Arishtanemi
are still in Devagiri preparing for the material transfer. Also, the standing contingent in
Mount Mandar cannot be reduced under any circumstances. We may not have enough
soldiers for two caravans. Perhaps, we could all travel together day after tomorrow’
‘I am sure there won’t be a problem,’ said Daksha. ‘And don’t you always say that each
Arishtanemi is equal to fifty enemy soldiers? It’s settled. The Lord Neelkanth, Veerini
and Sati will leave tomorrow morning. Please make all the arrangements.’
Parvateshwar went unhappily back to his thoughts as Shiva and Sati started whispering
to each other again.
‘You did go for a shudhikaran, didn’t you?’ asked Sati seriously.
‘Yes,’ said Shiva. He wasn’t lying. He had gone for a purification ceremony on his last
night at Devagiri. He didn’t believe he needed it. However, he knew that Sati would ask
him the next time they met. And he didn’t want to lie to her.
‘Though I think the concept of doing a shudhikaran is completely absurd,’ whispered

 Shiva. ‘In fact, the entire concept of the vikarma is ridiculous. I think that is one of the
few things in Meluha that is not fair and should be changed.’
Sati looked up suddenly at Shiva, her face devoid of any expression. Shiva stared hard
into her eyes, trying to gauge some of the thoughts running through her mind. But he hit
a blank wall.

 
It was the beginning of the second prahar the next day when Shiva, Veerini, Sati and
Nandi departed for Devagiri along with a hundred Arishtanemi. Daksha, Parvateshwar
and Kanakhala stood outside the guest house to see them off. Brahaspati had been
detained by some scheduled experiments.
The entourage had to sit in the same carriage as there were guidelines that a minimum
of four carriages had to be kept aside for any caravan that carried the Emperor. Since
the royal procession had come in five carriages, that left only one carriage for this
caravan. Parvateshwar
was deeply unhappy about the unorthodox way in which
members of the royal family had to travel without any dummy carriages, but his
objections were overruled by Daksha.
Sitting on one of the comfortable sofas inside the carriage, Sati noticed that Shiva was
wearing his cravat again. ‘Why do you cover your throat all the time?’
‘I am uncomfortable with the attention that comes when anyone sees the blue throat,’
replied Shiva.
‘But you will have to get used to it. The blue throat is not going to disappear.’
‘True,’ answered Shiva with a smile. ‘But till I get used to it, the cravat is my shield.’
As the caravan left, Parvateshwar and Kanakhala came up to Daksha.
‘Why do you have so much faith in that man, my Lord?’ asked Parvateshwar of Daksha.
‘He has done nothing to deserve respect. How can he lead us to victory when he has
not even been trained for it? The entire concept of the Neelkanth goes against our rules.
In Meluha a person is supposed to be given a task only if he is found capable of it and
trained by the system.’
‘We are in a state of war, Parvateshwar,’ replied Daksha. ‘An undeclared one, but a
state of war all the same. We face a terrorist attack every other week. These cowardly
Chandravanshis
don’t even attack from the front so that we can fight them. And our
army is too small to attack their territory openly. Our “rules” are not working. We need a
miracle. And the first rule of serendipity is that miracles come when we forget rational
laws and have faith. I have faith in the Neelkanth. And so do my people.’
‘But Shiva has no faith in himself. How can you force him to be our saviour when he
himself doesn’t want to do it?’
‘Sati will change that.’
‘My Lord, you are going to use your own daughter as bait?’ asked a horrified
Parvateshwar. And do you really want a saviour who decides to help us just because of
his lust!’
‘IT IS NOT LUST!’
Parvateshwar and Kanakhala kept quiet, shocked by Daksha’s reaction.
‘What kind of a father do you think I am?’ asked Daksha. You think I will use my
daughter so? She just may find comfort and happiness with the Lord. She has suffered
enough already. I want her to be happy. And if in doing so, I help my country as well,
what is the harm?’
Parvateshwar was about to say something, but thought the better of it.
‘We need to destroy the Chandravanshi ideology,’ continued Daksha. ‘And the only way
we can do that is if we can give the benefits of our lifestyle to the people of Swadweep.
The common Swadweepans
will be grateful for this, but their Chandravanshi rulers will

 try everything in their power to stop us. They may be able to resist us, but try as they
might, they cannot stop a people led by the Neelkanth. And if Sati is with the Neelkanth,
there is no way he would refuse to lead us against the Chandravanshis.’
‘But your Highness, do you really think the Lord would come to our side just because he
is in love with your daughter?’ asked Kanakhala.
‘You have missed the point. The Lord does not need to be convinced to be on our side,’
said Daksha. ‘He already is. We are a great civilisation. Maybe not perfect, but great all
the same. One has to be blind to not see that. What the Neelkanth needs is the
motivation and belief in himself to lead us. That belief in himself will assert itself when
he moves closer to Sati.’
‘And how is that going to happen, your Highness?’ asked Parvateshwar,
frowning
slightly.
‘You know what is the most powerful force in a man’s life?’ asked Daksha.
Kanakhala and Parvateshwar looked at Daksha nonplussed.
‘It is his intense desire to impress the person he loves most,’ expounded Daksha. ‘Look
at me. I have always loved my father. My desire to impress him is what is driving me
even today. Even after his death, I still want to make him proud of me. It is driving me to
my destiny as the King who will re-establish the pure Suryavanshi way of life across
India. And when the Neelkanth develops a deep desire to make Sati proud of him, he
will rise to fulfil his destiny.’
Parvateshwar frowned, not quite agreeing with the logic, but kept quiet all the same.
‘But what if Sati seeks something different?’ asked Kanakhala. ‘Like a husband who
spends all his time with her.’
‘I know my daughter,’ replied Daksha confidendy. ‘I know what it takes to impress her.’
‘That’s an interesting point of view, my Lord,’ smiled Kanakhala. ‘Just out of curiosity,
what do you think is the most powerful force in a woman’s life?’
Daksha laughed out loud. ‘Why do you ask? Don’t you know?’
‘Well the most powerful force in my life is the desire to get out of the house before my
mother-in-law wakes up!’
Both Daksha and Kanakhala guffawed loudly.
Parvateshwar didn’t seem to find it funny. ‘I am sorry but that is no way to speak about
your mother-in-law.’
‘Oh relax, Parvateshwar,’ said Kanakhala. ‘You take everything too seriously’
‘I think,’ said Daksha smiling, ‘the most powerful force in a woman’s life is the need to
be appreciated, loved and cherished for what she is.’
Kanakhala smiled and nodded. Her emperor truly understood human emotions.

  
CHAPTER 10
The Hooded Figure Returns
 
As the caravan emerged from the carefully chiselled passage leading out from the
depths of Mount Mandar, Veerini requested that the carriage be stopped for a minute.
Veerini, Sati, Shiva and Nandi went down on their knees and offered a short prayer to
the mountain for its continued benefaction. Watching over them on high alert was the
Arishtanemi Bhabravya, a strapping man of sixty years with an intimidating moustache
and beard.
After a short while, Bhabravya came up to Veerini and said with barely concealed
impatience: ‘Your Highness, perhaps it’s time to get back into the carriage.’
Veerini looked up at the captain and with a quick nod got up. Sati, Shiva and Nandi
followed.

 
‘It’s her,’ said Vishwadyumna putting down the scope and turning towards his Lord.
The platoon was at a safe distance, concealed from the caravan. The dense and
impenetrable foliage was an effective shield.
‘Yes’, said the hooded figure and let his eyes linger on Shiva’s muscular body. Even
without using the scope he was in no doubt that this was the same man who had fought
him at the Brahma temple some weeks ago. ‘Who is that man?’
‘I don’t know my Lord.’
‘Keep your eye on him. He was the one who foiled the last attack.’
Vishwadyumna
wanted to say that the previous attempt failed because it was
unplanned. The presence
of the caste-unmarked
man had litde role to play.
Vishwadyumna could not understand the recent irrational decisions of his Lord. It was
unlike him. Perhaps it was the closeness of the ultimate objective that was clouding his
judgement. Vishwadyumna was, however, wise enough to keep his thoughts to himself.
‘Perhaps we could track them for around an hour before we attack, my Lord. It will be a
safe distance from the Arishtanemi back-up. We can get this over with quickly and
report back to the Queen that the informer was correct’
‘No, we’ll wait for a few hours more when they are at least a half day’s distance from
Mount Mandar. Their new carriages have systems that can send an emergency signal
immediately. We need to ensure our task is done before back-up arrives.’
‘Yes, my Lord,’ said Vishwadyumna,
happy to see that his Lord’s famed tactical
brilliance had not diminished.
‘And, remember, I want it done quickly,’ added the hooded figure. ‘The more time we
take, the more people get hurt.’
‘Yes, my Lord.’

 
It was the beginning of the third prahar when the caravan stopped at the half-way
clearing for lunch. Here the forest had been cut back to a distance that made a surprise
attack impossible. The Queen’s maids quickly unpacked the food and started heating it

 in the centre of the clearing. The royal party and Shiva were sitting closer to the head of
the caravan, in the direction towards Devagiri. Bhabravya stood on the higher ground in
the rear, keeping an eagle eye on the surroundings. Apart from the royal party, half the
Arishtanemi soldiers had also sat down to eat while the others kept watch.
Shiva was about take a second helping of rice when he heard the crack of a twig down
the road. Stopping mid-way, he listened intently for another sound. There was none. His
instincts told him this was a predator, who realising he had made a mistake, was now
keeping still. Shiva looked over at Sati to see if she had heard the sound. She too was
staring intently down the road. There was a soft crunch as the foot on the broken twig
eased its pressure slightly. It would have been missed by most, except a focussed
listener.
Shiva immediately put his plate down, pulled out his sword and fixed his shield on his
back. Bhabravya saw Shiva across the caravan and drew his sword as well, giving
quick, silent signals to his men to do the same. The Arishtanemi were battle ready in a
matter of seconds. Sati and Nandi too pulled out their swords and got into traditional
fighter positions.
Sati whispered to Veerini without turning, ‘Mother, please sit in the carriage and lock it.
Take the maids in too. But get them to disconnect the horses from the carriage first We
are not retreating and we don’t want the enemy kidnapping you either.’
‘Come with me Sati,’ pleaded Veerini as her maids rushed to pull out the holds on the
carriage.
‘No, I’m staying here. Please hurry. We may not have much time.’
Veerini rushed into the carriage followed by the maids who quickly locked it from the
inside.
At a distance, Bhabravya whispered to his aide. ‘I know their tactics. I have seen these
cowards on the southern border. They will send an advance suicide party, pretend to
retreat and draw us into a stronghold. I don’t care about the losses. We will chase those
bastards and destroy every single one of them. They have run into the Arishtanemi.
They will pay for this mistake.’
Shiva, meanwhile, turned to Sati and whispered carefully, ‘I think they must be aiming
for a high profile target. Nothing would be more significant than the royal family. Do you
think that you too should wait in the carriage?’
Sati’s eyes darted up at Shiva in surprise. A pained look crossed her face before being
replaced by a defiant glare. ‘I am going to fight...’
What’s wrong with her?! What I said is completely logical. Make the main objective of
the enemy difficult to get at and they will lose the will to fight.
Shiva pushed these thoughts out of his mind to focus on the road. The rest of the
caravan strained every nerve to Esten intentiy for any movement from the enemy. They
were prepared for the ambush. It was the enemy’s turn to make a move. Just as they
thought that it may have been a false alarm, the sound of a conch shell reverberated
from down the road — from the direction of Mount Mandar. Shiva turned around but did
not move. Whatever was making the noise was moving rapidly towards them.
Shiva could not recognise the cacophonic sound. However, the Arishtanemi from the
southern border knew exactly what it was. That was the sound of a Nagadhvani
conch.
It was blown to announce the launch of a Naga attack!
Though impatient to fight, Bhabravya did not forget the standard operating procedures.
He ordered an aide, who rushed to the carriage and pulled out a red box fixed at the
bottom. Kicking it open, the aide pressed a button on the side. A tubular chimney-like
structure extended straight up from the box for nearly twenty-five feet. The chimney
ensured that the smoke signal was not lost in the dense forest and could be seen by the
scouts at both Devagiri and Mount Mandar. The soldier picked a branch from the fire
and pushed it into the last of the four slots on the right side of the box. Red smoke

 fumed out of the chimney, signifying the presence of the highest level of danger. Help
was six hours away. Four, if the back-up rode hard. Bhabravya did not intend the battle
to last that long. He intended to kill each of the Nagas and the Chandravanshis long
before that.
Then the attack began, from the side of the road leading to Mount Mandar. A small
band of ten Chandravanshi
soldiers charged at the Arishtanemi. One soldier was
holding the Naga conch shell and blowing hard. Another amongst them had covered his
entire face and head with a cloth, except for small slits for his eyes. The Naga himself!
Shiva did not move. He could see the battle raging at the far end of the caravan. There
were only ten Chandravanshis. The Arishtanemi did not need any support. He signalled
to
Sati and Nandi to stay where they were. Sati agreed for she too expected this attack to
be a ruse.
The battle was short and fierce. The Chandravanshi soldiers fought viciously but were
outnumbered. As Bhabravya expected, they turned in no time and retreated fast.
‘After them,’ yelled Bhabravya. ‘Kill them all.’
The Arishtanemi
dashed
behind their captain in pursuit of the retreating
Chandravanshis.
Most of them did not hear Shiva cry out loud. ‘No! Stay here. Don’t
chase them.’
By the time some of the Arishtanemi heard Shiva’s order, a majority had already left,
chasing the Chandravanshis.
Shiva was left in the clearing with Sati, Nandi and just
twenty—five soldiers. Shiva turned back towards the side of the road leading to Devagiri
— the direction from which the crack of the twig had come.
He turned again to look at the remaining Arishtanemi. Pointing towards his back, he
spoke with a voice that was both steady and calm, ‘This is where the actual attack will
come from. Get into a tight formation in fours, facing that direction. Keep the princess in
the middle. We will have to hold them back for about five or ten minutes. The other
Arishtanemi will return when they realise there are no Chandravanshis to fight in that
direction.’
The Arishtanemi looked at Shiva and nodded. They were batde-hardened men. They
liked nothing more than a clearheaded and calm leader who knew exactiy what he was
doing. They quickly got into the formation ordered by Shiva and waited.
Then the real attack began. Forty Chandravanshi soldiers led by a hooded figure
emerged from the trees, walking slowly towards the Suryavanshi
caravan. The
outnumbered
Arishtanemi remained stationary, waiting for their enemy to come to them.
‘Surrender the princess to us and we will leave,’ said the hooded figure. ‘We want no
unnecessary bloodshed.’
The same joker from the Brahma temple? He ‘s got a strange costume, but he fights
well.
‘We don’t want any bloodshed either,’ said Shiva. ‘Leave quietly and we promise not to
kill you.’
‘You’ re the one who’s looking at death in the face, barbarian,’ said the hooded figure,
conveying anger through his posture rather than his voice, which remained eerily
composed.
Shiva noticed the brown-turbaned officer look impatiently at the hooded figure. He
clearly wanted to attack fast and get this over with.
Dissension in the ranks?
‘The only face I’m looking at is a stupid festival mask. And it’s soon going to be shoved
down your pathetic little throat! Also tell that brainless lieutenant of yours that he
shouldn’t give battle plans away.’
The hooded figure remained calm. Not turning to look at Vishwadyumna.

 Damn! This man is good.
‘This is the last warning, barbarian,’ repeated the hooded figure. ‘Hand her over right
now’
Sati suddenly turned towards the carriage as she realised something, shouting, ‘Mother!
The new emergency conch shell close to the front grill. Blow it now!’
A loud plea for help emitted from the carriage. Bhabravya and his men had been
summoned. The hooded figure cursed as he realised his advantage had been taken
away. He had very little time to complete his operation. The other Suryavanshis would
be back soon. ‘Charge!’
The Arishtanemi stayed in position.
‘Steady,’ said Shiva. ‘Wait for them. All you have to do is buy time. Keep the princess
safe. Our friends will be back soon.’
As the Chandravanshis
came closer, Sati suddenly broke through the cordon and
attacked the hooded figure. Sati’s surprise attack slowed the charge of the
Chandravanshis. The Arishtanemi had no choice. They charged at the Chandravanshis
like vicious tigers.
Shiva moved quickly to protect the right flank of Sati as an advancing Vishwadyumna
got dangerously close to her. Vishwadyumna swung his sword to force Shiva out of his
way. However, the speed of Shiva’s advance left Vishwadyumna unbalanced. Shiva
easily parried the blow and pushed Vishwadyumna
back with his shield. Nandi
meanwhile moved rapidly to the left of Sati to block the Chandravanshis trying to charge
down that side.
In the meantime, Sati was attacking the hooded figure with fierce blows. The hooded
figure, however, seemed intent to defend himself and was not striking back. He wanted
her alive and unharmed.
Shiva cut Vishwadyumna savagely across the shoulder that had been exposed when he
was pushed back. Grimacing, Vishwadyumna brought his shield up to fend off another
attack from Shiva. With the same movement, Vishwadyumna brought his sword arm up
to thrust at Shiva’s torso. Shiva quickly pulled his shield in to protect himself. But not
quickly enough. Vishwadyumna was able to slash Shiva’s chest. Stepping back and
jumping to his right, Shiva brought his sword swifdy down in a brutal jab. While
Vishwadyumna prompdy brought his shield up to block the attack, Shiva’s unorthodox
move unsettled him. He staggered
back realising that Shiva was an excellent
swordsman. It was going to be a hard and long duel.
Nandi had already brought down one Chandravanshi soldier who had broken a law of
combat of never attacking below the waist and cut Nandi’s thigh. Bleeding profusely,
Nandi was ferociously battling another soldier who had attacked him from the left. The
Chandravanshi brought his shield down hard on Nandi’s injured leg, making him stagger
and fall. The Chandravanshi thought he had his man. Raising his sword high with both
his hands, he was about to bring it down to finish the job but he suddenly arched
forward, as if a brutal force had pounded him from the back. As he fell, Nandi saw a
knife buried deep in the Chandravanshi’s
back. Looking up, he saw Shiva’s left arm
continue down in a smooth arc from the release of the dagger. With his right hand,
Shiva brought his sword up to block a vicious cut from Vishwadyumna. As Nandi
stumbled back to his feet, Shiva reached behind to pull his shield in front again.
The hooded figure knew they were taking too long. The other Arishtanemi would be
back soon. He tried to go behind Sati, to club her on the back of the head and knock her
unconscious but she was too quick. She moved swifdy to the left to face her enemy
again. Taking a knife out of her angvastram folds with her left hand, she slashed
outwards to cut deep across the hooded figure’s immense stomach. The knife sliced
through the robe but its effect was broken by the armour.
And then with a resounding roar, Bhabravya and the other Arishtanemi rushed back to

 fight alongside their mates.
Seeing themselves vastly outnumbered, the hooded figure had no choice. He ordered
his soldiers to retreat. Shiva stopped Bhabravya from chasing the Chandravanshis once
again.
‘Let them go, brave Bhabravya,’ said Shiva. ‘We will have other chances to get them.
Right now the primary objective is to protect the royal family’
Bhabravya looked at Shiva with admiration for the way this foreigner fought, not the blue
throat of which he was unaware. He nodded politely. ‘It makes sense, foreigner.’
Bhabravya quickly formed the Arishtanemi soldiers into a tight perimeter and pulled the
wounded within. Dead bodies were not touched. At least three Arishtanemi lost their
lives while nine Chandravanshi bodies lay in the clearing. The last one had taken his
own life since he was too wounded to escape. Better to meet one’s maker rather than
fall alive in enemy hands and reveal secrets. Bhabravya ordered his soldiers to stay low
and keep their shields in front for protection against any arrows. And they waited so till
the rescue party arrived.

 
‘My God,’ cried an anxious Daksha as he hugged Sati tight.
The rescue party of five hundred soldiers had reached by the fourth hour of the second
prahar. Daksha, Brahaspati and Kanakhala had accompanied the caravan despite
Parvateshwar’s warnings of the risks. Releasing Sati from his grip, Daksha whispered
as a small tear escaped his eyes, ‘You are not injured, are you?’
‘I am alright father,’ said Sati self-consciously. ‘Just a few cuts. Nothing serious.’
‘She fought very bravely,’ said Veerini, as she beamed with pride.
‘I think that is a mother’s bias,’ said Sati, as her serious expression was restored.
Turning towards Shiva, she continued, ‘It was Shiva who saved the day, father. He
figured out the real plan of the Chandravanshis
and rallied everyone at the crucial
moment. It was because of him that we beat them back.’
‘Oh, I think she’s too generous,’ said Shiva.
She’s impressed. Finally!!
‘She isn’t being generous at all, my Lord,’ said a visibly grateful Daksha. ‘You have
started your magic already. We have actually beaten back a terrorist attack. You don’t
know how significant this is for us!’
‘But it wasn’t a terrorist attack, your Highness’ said Shiva. ‘It was an attempt to kidnap
the princess.’
‘Kidnap?’ asked Daksha.
‘That hooded man certainly wanted her alive and unharmed.’
‘What hooded man?!’ cried Daksha, alarmed.
‘That was the Naga, your Highness,’ said Shiva, surprised at Daksha’s hysterical
response. ‘I have seen that man fight. He is an excellent warrior. A little slow in his
movements, but excellent all the same. But while fighting Sati he was trying his best not
to hurt her.’
The colour drained completely from Daksha’s face. Veerini glared at her husband with a
strange mixture of fear and anger. The expressions on their faces made Shiva feel
uncomfortable, as if he was intruding on a private family moment.
‘Father?’ asked a worried Sati. ‘Are you alright?’
Hearing no response from Daksha, Shiva turned to Sati and said, ‘Perhaps it’s best if
you speak to your family alone. If you don’t mind, I will go check if Nandi and the other
soldiers are alright.’

  
Parvateshwar was walking around his men, checking on the injured and ensuring that
they received medical help, with Bhabravya two steps behind. He came up to the
Chandravanshi who had been killed by Shiva while protecting Nandi. He roared in
horror, ‘This man has been stabbed in the back!’
‘Yes, my Lord,’ said Bhabravya with his head bowed.
‘Who did this? Who broke the sacred rules of combat?’
‘I think it was the foreigner, my Lord. But I heard that he was trying to protect Captain
Nandi who had been attacked by this Chandravanshi. And the Chandravanshi himself
was not following the combat rules having attacked Nandi below the waist.’
Parvateshwar turned with a withering look at Bhabravya, causing him to cower in fear.
‘Rules are rules,’ he growled. ‘They are meant to be followed even if your enemy
ignores them.’
‘Yes, my Lord.’
‘Go make sure that the dead get proper cremations. Including the Chandravanshis.’
‘My Lord?’ asked a surprised Bhabravya. ‘But they are terrorists.’
‘They may be terrorists,’ snarled Parvateshwar. ‘But we are Suryavanshis. We are the
followers of Lord Ram. There are norms that we follow even towards our enemies. The
Chandravanshis will get proper cremations. Is that clear?’
‘Yes, my Lord.’

 
‘Why do you call the foreigner “Your Lord”?’ asked an injured Arishtanemi lying next to
Nandi.
Shiva had just departed after spending half an hour with Nandi and the other injured
soldiers. If one saw the injured at this point, it would be impossible to believe that they
had fought a battle just a few hours ago. They were talking jovially with each other.
Some were ribbing their mates about how they had fallen for the red-herring at the
beginning of the battle. In the Kshatriya way, to laugh in the face of death was the
ultimate mark of a man.
‘Because he is my Lord,’ answered Nandi simply.
‘But he is a foreigner. A caste unmarked foreigner,’ said the Arishtanemi. ‘He is a brave
warrior, no doubt. But there are so many brave warriors in Meluha. What makes him so
special? And why does he spend so much time with the royal family?’
‘I can’t answer that, my friend. You will get to find out when the time is right.’
The Arishtanemi looked at Nandi quizzically. Then shook his head and smiled. He was
a soldier. He bothered himself only with the here and now. Bigger questions did not
dwell too long in his mind. ‘In any case, I think the time is right to tell you that you are a
brave man, my friend. I saw you fight despite your injury. You don’t know the meaning of
the word surrender. I would be proud to have you as my bhraata! ’
That was a big statement from the Arishtanemi. The bhraata system that was followed
in the Meluhan army meant that each soldier up to the rank of a captain was assigned a
mate of equal rank. The two bhraatas would be like brothers who would always fight
together and look out for each other. They would willingly fight the world for each other,
would never love the same woman and would always tell each other the truth, no matter
how bitter.
The Arishtanemi were elite soldiers of the empire. An Arishtanemi offered to be a
bhraata only to his own kind. Nandi knew that he could never really be the Arishtanemi’s
bhraata. He had to stay with the Lord. But the honour of being offered the brotherhood
of an Arishtanemi was enough to bring tears to Nandi’s eyes.

 ‘Don’t get teary on me now,’ chorded the Arishtanemi, wrinkling his nose in amusement.
Nandi burst out in laughter as he slapped the Arishtanemi on his arm.
‘What is your name, my friend?’ asked Nandi.
‘Kaustav,’ replied the Arishtanemi. ‘Someday we shall batde the main Chandravanshi
army together, my friend. And by the grace of Lord Ram, we will kill all those bastards!’
‘By Lord Agni, we will!’

 
‘It was interesting how you got into the Naga’s mind,’ said Brahaspati as he watched
Shiva getting the gash on his torso cleaned and dressed.
Shiva had insisted that his injuries receive medical attention only after every other
soldier’s wounds had been tended.
‘Well, I can’t really explain it,’ said Shiva. ‘How the Naga would think just seemed so
obvious to me.’
‘Well, I can explain it!’
‘Really? What?’
‘The explanation is that you are the omnipotent “N”, whose name cannot be spoken!’
said Brahaspati, opening his eyes wide and conjuring his hands up like an ancient
magician.
They burst out laughing, causing Shiva to rock back slightly. The military doctor gave
Shiva a stern look, at which he immediately quietened down and let him finish tending to
the wound. Having applied the Ayurvedic paste and covering it with the medicinal neem
leaf, the doctor bandaged the wound with a cotton cloth.
‘You will need to change that every second day, foreigner,’ said the doctor pointing at
the bandage. ‘The royal doctor in Devagiri will be able to do it for you. And don’t let this
area get wet for a week. Also, avoid the Somras for this period since you will not be able
to take a complete bath.’
‘Oh he doesn’t need the Somras,’ joked Brahaspati. ‘It’s already done all the damage it
can on him.’
Shiva and Brahaspati collapsed into helpless laughter again as the doctor walked away,
shaking his head in exasperation.
‘But seriously,’ said Brahaspati calming down. ‘Why would they attack you? You have
not harmed anybody’
‘I don’t think the attack was on me. I think it was for Sati.’
‘Sati! Why Sati? That’s even more bizarre.’
‘It probably wasn’t specifically for Sati,’ said Shiva. ‘I think the target was the royal
family. The primary target was probably the Emperor. Since he wasn’t there, they went
for the secondary target, Sati. I think the aim was to kidnap a royal and use that person
as leverage.’
Brahaspati did not respond. He seemed worried. Clasping his hands together and
bringing them close to his face, he looked into the distance, deep in thought. Shiva
reached into his pouch and pulled out his chillum, before carefully filling it with some
dried marijuana. Brahaspati turned to look at his friend, unhappy at what he was doing.
‘I’ve never told you this before Shiva and I probably shouldn’t as, well... since you are a
free man,’ said Brahaspati. ‘But I consider you my friend. And it is my duty to tell you the
truth. I have seen some Egyptian merchants in Karachapa with this marijuana habit. It’s
not good for you.’
‘You’re wrong, my friend,’ said Shiva, grinning broadly. ‘This is actually the best habit in
the world.’
‘You probably don’t know, Shiva. This has many harmful side effects. And worst of all, it
even harms your memory, causing untold damage to your ability to draw on past

 knowledge.’
Shiva’s face suddenly became uncharacteristically
serious. He gazed back at
Brahaspati with a melancholic smile. ‘That is exactly why it is good, my friend. No idiot
who smokes this is scared of forgetting’
Shiva lit up his chillum, took a deep drag and continued, ‘They are scared of not
forgetting.’
Brahaspati stared sharply at Shiva, wondering what terrible past could have prompted
his friend to get addicted to the weed.

  
CHAPTER 11
Neelkanth Unveiled
 
The next morning the royal caravan resumed its journey to Devagiri after spending the
night at a temporary camp in the clearing. It wasn’t safe to travel at night considering the
circumstances. The wounded, including Nandi, were lying in the first three carriages and
the fifth one. The royal family and Shiva travelled in the fourth. All the soldiers who had
fought in the previous day’s batde were given the privilege of riding on horses in relative
comfort. Brahaspati and Kanakhala walked along with the rest of the troops, in
mourning for the three slain Arishtanemi. Parvateshwar,
Bhabravya and two other
soldiers bore a make-shift wooden palanquin that carried three urns containing the
ashes of the martyrs. The urns would be given to their families for a ceremonial
submersion in the Saraswati. Shiva, Sati and Nandi too wanted to walk but the doctor
insisted they were in no condition to do so.
Parvateshwar walked with pride at the bravery of his soldiers. His boys , as he called
them, had shown they were made of a metal forged in Lord Indra’s own furnace. He
cursed himself for not being there to fight with them. He castigated himself for not being
there to protect his goddaughter, bis Sati, when she was in danger. He prayed for the
day when he would finally get a chance to destroy the cowardly Chandravanshis.
He
also silendy pledged that he would anonymously donate his salary for the next six
months to the families of the slain soldiers.
‘Even I didn’t think he would fall to these levels!’ exclaimed Daksha in disgust.
Shiva and Sati, comfortably asleep in the carriage, were woken up by Daksha’s
outburst. Veerini looked up from the book that she was reading, narrowing her eyes to
concentrate on her husband.
‘Who, your Highness?’ asked Shiva groggjly.
‘Dilipa! That blight on humanity!’ said Daksha, barely concealing his loathing.
Veerini continued to stare hard at her husband. She slowly reached out, pulled Sati’s
hand in hers, brought it close to her lips and kissed it gentiy. Then she put her other
hand protectively on top of Sati’s hand. Sati looked at her mother warmly with a hint of a
smile and rested her tired head on Veerini’s shoulders.
‘Who is Dilipa, your Highness?’ asked Shiva.
‘He is the Emperor of Swadweep,’ answered Daksha. ‘Everyone knows Sati is the apple
of my eye. And they were possibly trying to kidnap her to force my hand!’
Shiva gazed at Daksha with sympathy. He could understand the outrage of the Emperor
at the latest Chandravanshi treachery.
‘And to be reduced to the level of even using a Naga for this nefarious plan,’ said a
furious Daksha. ‘This just shows what the Chandravanshis are capable of!’
‘I don’t know if the Naga was being used, your Highness,’ said Shiva softiy. ‘It appeared
as though he was the leader.’
Daksha however was too lost in his righteous anger to even explore Shiva’s insinuation.
‘The Naga may have been the leader of this particular platoon, my Lord, but he would
almost certainly be under the overall command of the Chandravanshis. No Naga can be
a leader. They are cursed people born with horrific deformities and diseases in this birth
as a punishment for terrible crimes that they have committed in their previous birth. The
Nagas are embarrassed to even show their face to anyone. But they have tremendous
power and skills. Their presence strikes terror in the heart of all Meluhans, and most

 Swadweepans
as well. The Chandravanshis
have sunk low enough to even consort
with those deformed demons. They hate us so much that they don’t even realise the
sins they are bringing on their own souls by interacting with the Nagas.’
Shiva, Sati and Veerini continued to hear Daksha’s ranting in silence.
Turning towards Shiva, Daksha continued, ‘Do you see the kind of vermin we are up
against, my Lord? They have no code, no honour. And they outnumber us ten to one.
We need your help my Lord. It’s not just my people, but my family as well. We are in
danger.’
‘Your Highness, I will do all that I can to help you,’ said Shiva. ‘But I am not a general. I
cannot lead an army against the Chandravanshis. I am just a simple tribal leader. What
difference can one man make?’
‘At least let me announce your presence to the court and the people, my Lord,’ urged
Daksha. ‘Just spend a few weeks travelling through the empire. Your presence will raise
the morale of the people. Look at the difference you made yesterday. We actually foiled
a terrorist attack because of you, because of your presence of mind. Please, let me
announce your arrival. That is all I ask.’
Shiva looked at Daksha’s earnest face with trepidation. He could feel Sati’s and
Veerini’s eyes on him. Especially Sati’s.
What am I getting myself into?
‘All right,’ said Shiva in resignation.
Daksha got up and hugged Shiva in an unyielding grip.
‘Thank you, my Lord!’ exclaimed Daksha, as Shiva withdrew from his embrace to come
up for air. ‘I will announce your presence at the court tomorrow itself. Then you can
leave for a tour of the empire in another three weeks. I will personally make all the
arrangements. You will have a full brigade travelling with you for security. Parvateshwar
and Sati will accompany you as well.’
‘No!’ protested Veerini in a harsh tone that Sati had never heard her mother use. ‘Sati is
not going anywhere. I am not going to allow you to put our daughter’s life in danger. She
is staying with me in Devagiri.’
‘Veerini, don’t be silly,’ said Daksha calmly. ‘You really think that anything would happen
to Sati if the Lord Neelkanth was around. She is at the safest when she is with the Lord.’
‘She is not going. And that is final!’ glared Veerini in a firm voice, clutching Sati’s hand
tighdy.
Daksha turned towards Shiva, ignoring Veerini. ‘Don’t worry, my Lord. I will have all the
arrangements made. Parvateshwar and Sati will also travel with you. You will just have
to restrain Sati sometimes.’
Shiva frowned. So did Sati.
Daksha smiled genially. ‘My darling daughter has the tendency to be a litde too brave at
times. like this one time, when she was just a child, she had jumped in all by herself,
with nothing but her short sword, to save an old woman being attacked by a pack of wild
dogs. She nearly got herself killed for her pains. It was one of the worst days of my life. I
think it is the same impulsiveness which worries Veerini as well.’
Shiva looked at Sati. There was no expression on her face.
‘That’s why,’ continued Daksha, ‘I am suggesting that you keep her restrained. Then
there should be no problem.’
Shiva glanced again at Sati. He felt a surge of admiration coupled with the boundless
love he felt for her.
She did what I couldn’t do.

 
The next morning, Shiva found himself seated

next to Daksha in the Meluhan royal

 court. The magnificence of the court left him wonderstruck. Since this was a public
building, the usual Meluhan reticence and understated designs had been bypassed. It
was built next to the Great Public Bath. While the platform had been constructed of the
standard kiln-bricks, the structure itself, including the floor, was made of teak wood —
easily carved and shaped, yet strong. Brawny wooden pillars had been laid into set
grooves on the platform. The pillars had been extravagantly sculpted with celestial
figures like apsaras,
devas
and rishis — celestial
nymphs, gods
and sages
—
amongst others. An ornately carved wooden roof that had been inlaid with gold and
silver designs crowned the top of the pillars. Pennants of the holy blue colour and royal
red colour hung from the ceiling. Each niche on the walls had paintings depicting the life
of Lord Ram. But Shiva had little time to admire the glorious architecture of the court.
Daksha’s expectations would be apparent in his speech and were causing him
considerable discomfort.
‘As many of you may have heard,’ announced Daksha, ‘there was another terrorist
attack yesterday. The Chandravanshis tried to harm the royal family on the road from
Mount Mandar to Devagiri.’
Murmurs of dismay filled the court. The question troubling everyone was how the
Chandravanshis
had discovered the route to Mount Mandar. Shiva meanwhile kept
reminding himself that this wasn’t a terrorist attack. It was just a kidnap attempt.
‘The Chandravanshis
had planned their attack with great deception,’ said Daksha,
drowning out the murmurs with his booming voice.
The talented architects of the court had designed the structure in a manner that any
voice spoken from the royal platform resonated across the entire hall. ‘But we beat them
back. For the first time in decades, we beat back a cowardly terrorist attack.’
An exultant roar went up in the court at this announcement. They had beaten back open
military assaults from the Chandravanshis before. But until this day, the Meluhans had
found no answer to the dreaded terrorist strikes. For the terrorists usually launched
surprise attacks on non-military locations and fled before the Suryavanshi soldiers could
arrive.
Raising his hand to quieten the crowd, Daksha continued, ‘We beat them back because
the time for truth to triumph has finally arrived! We beat them back because we were led
by Father Manu’s messenger! We beat them back because our time for justice has
come!’
The murmurs grew louder. Had the Neelkanth finally arrived? Everyone had heard the
rumours. But nobody believed them. There had been too many false declarations in the
past.
Daksha raised his hand. He waited for just enough time for the anticipation to build up.
And then jubilantly bellowed, ‘Yes! The rumours are true. Our saviour has come! The
Neelkanth has come!’
Shiva winced at being put on display on the royal platform with his cravat removed. The
Meluhan elite thronged around him, their varying statements buzzing in Shiva’s ears.
‘We had heard the rumours, my Lord. But we never believed them to be true.’
‘We have nothing to fear anymore, my Lord. The days of evil are numbered!’
‘Where are you from, my Lord?’
‘Mount Kailash? Where is that, my Lord? I would like to take a pilgrimage there.’
Answering these repeated questions and being confronted by the blind faith of these
people disturbed Shiva. The moment he had a chance, he requested Daksha for
permission to leave the court.

 
A few hours later, Shiva sat in the quiet comfort of his chamber, considering

what had

 happened at the court. The cravat was back around his neck.
‘By the Holy Lake, can I really deliver these people from their troubles?’
‘What did you say, my Lord?’ asked Nandi, who was sitting patiently at a distance.
‘The faith of your people makes me anxious,’ said Shiva, loud enough for Nandi to hear.
‘If there was a one-on-one battie, I could take on any enemy to protect your people. But
I am no leader. And I am certainly not a “destroyer of evil”.’
‘I am sure that you can lead us to victory against anyone, my Lord. You beat them back
on the road to Devagiri.’
‘That wasn’t a genuine victory,’ said Shiva dismissively. ‘They were a small platoon,
aiming to kidnap and not to kill. If we face a well organised and large army, whose aim
is to kill, the situation may be very different. If you ask me, it appears that Meluha is
against some formidable and ruthless enemies. Your country doesn’t need faith in just
one man. That is not the answer. Your people need to adapt to the changing times.
Maybe you are too innocent in your way of life to actually take on such a cold-blooded
enemy. A new system is needed. I am not some god who will magically solve your
problems.’
‘You are right, my Lord,’ said Nandi, with all the conviction of a simple, lucky man not
troubled by too many thoughts. ‘A new system is required, and I obviously don’t know
what this new system should be. But I do understand one thing. More than a thousand
years back, we faced a similar situation and Lord Ram came and taught us a better
way. I am sure that, similarly, you will lead us to a superior path.’
‘I am no Lord Ram, Nandi!’
How can this fool even compare me to Lord Ram, the Maryada Purushottam, the Ideal
Man?
‘You are better than Lord Ram, my Lord,’ said Nandi.
‘Stop this nonsense, Nandi! What have I done to even be compared with Lord Ram? Let
alone be considered better?’
‘But you will do deeds that will place you above him, my Lord.’ ‘Just shut up!’

 
The preparations for Shiva’s tour of the empire were in full swing. Shiva, however, still
found time for Sati’s dance lessons every afternoon. They were developing a quiet
friendship. But Shiva agonised over the fact that while she showed respect, there was
no softening of emotions in her or expression of feelings.
In the meantime, Shiva’s tribe had been summoned to Devagiri, where they were given
comfortable accommodation and jobs. Bhadra, however, was not to stay with the
Gunas. He had instead been assigned to accompany the Neelkanth on his voyage.
‘Veer bhadra! When the hell did you get this name?’ Shiva asked Bhadra, meeting him
for the first time since his departure from Kashmir.
‘Stupid reason actually,’ smiled Bhadra, whose slight hump had disappeared
completely, thanks to the magical Somras. ‘On the journey here, I saved the caravan
leader from a tiger attack. He gave me the tide for a brave man before my name.’
‘You fought a tiger single-handed?’ asked Shiva, clearly impressed.
Bhadra nodded feeling awkward.
‘Well, then you really deserve to be called Veerbhadra!’
‘Yeah right!’ smiled Bhadra, suddenly turning serious. ‘The crazy label of “destroyer of
evil”... Are you okay with this? You are not giving in to these pleas just because of your
past, are you?’
‘I am going with the flow right now, my friend. Something tells me that despite all my
misgivings, I can actually help these people. These Meluhans are completely mad, no
doubt. And I certainly can’t do ALL that they expect of me. But I do feel that if I can

 make a difference, however small, I can reconcile with my past.’
‘If you are sure, then so am I. I will follow you anywhere.’
‘Don’t follow. Walk beside me!’
Veerbhadra laughed and embraced his friend. ‘I missed you Shiva.’
‘I missed you too.’
‘Let’s meet in the garden in the afternoon. I’ve got a great batch of marijuana.’
‘It’s a deal!’
Brahaspati too had sought permission to travel with Shiva. He explained that a
Mesopotamian ship carrying some rare chemicals, essential for a critical experiment,
was to dock at the port city of Karachapa soon. His team had to check and obtain those
materials anyway. It would be a good idea to do this while travelling with Shiva. Daksha
said that he had no problems with Brahaspati joining the tour if the Lord was okay with
it. Shiva agreed enthusiastically to the suggestion.
Three weeks after the court announcement about the Neelkanth, the day finally dawned
for Shiva’s tour of the empire. On the morning of the day itself, Daksha walked into
Shiva’s chambers.
‘You could have summoned me, your Highness,’ said Shiva with a namaste. ‘You did
not need to come here.’
‘It is my pleasure to come to your chambers, my Lord,’ smiled Daksha, returning Shiva’s
greeting with a low bow. ‘I thought I would introduce the physician who would be
travelling with your entourage. She arrived from Kashmir last night.’
Daksha moved aside to let his escort show the doctor into the room.
‘Ayurvati!’ exclaimed Shiva, his face lit up in a brilliant smile. ‘It’s so good to see you
again!’
‘The pleasure is all mine, my Lord,’ beamed Ayurvati, as she bent down to touch Shiva’s
feet.
Shiva immediately moved back to neatly side-step Ayurvati. ‘I have told you before,
Ayurvati,’ said Shiva. ‘You are a giver of life. Please don’t embarrass me by touching my
feet.’
‘And you are the Neelkanth, my Lord. The destroyer of evil,’ said Ayurvati with devotion.
‘How can you deny me the privilege of being blessed by you?’
Shiva shook his head in despair and let Ayurvati touch his feet. He gently touched her
head and blessed her.
A few hours later, Shiva, Sati, Parvateshwar, Brahaspati, Ayurvati, Krittika, Nandi and
Veerbhadra set off. Accompanying them was a brigade of fifteen hundred soldiers,
twenty-five handmaidens and fifty support staff for their security and comfort. They
planned to travel by road till the city of Kotdwaar on the Beas river. From there, they
would use boats to travel to the port city of Karachapa. Then they would move due east
to the city of Lothal. Finally, they would move north by road to the inland delta of the
Saraswati and then by boats back to Devagiri.

  
CHAPTER 12
Journey through Meluha
 
‘Who was Manu?’ asked Shiva. ‘I have heard of him often, referred to as “the Father”.’
The caravan had been travelling for a few days on the broad road from Devagiri to
Kotdwaar. The central part consisted of a row of seven carriages identical to the ones
used during the trip to Mandar. Five of them were empty. Shiva, Sati, Brahaspati and
Krittika travelled in the second carriage. Parvateshwar
was in the fifth, along with
Ayurvati and his key brigadiers. The general’s presence meant every rule had to be
adhered to strictly. Hence Nandi, whose rank did not allow him to travel in the carriage,
was riding a horse with the rest of the cavalry. Veerbhadra had been inducted as a
soldier in Nandi’s platoon. Led by their respective captains, the brigade were in
standard forward, rear and side defence formations around the caravan.
Both Brahaspati and Sati started answering Shiva simultaneously.
‘Lord Manu was the...’
They both stopped talking.
‘After you please, Brahaspatiji,’ said Sati.
‘No, no,’ said Brahaspati with a warm smile. ‘Why don’t you tell him the story?’
He knew whose voice the Neelkanth would prefer.
‘Of course not, Brahaspatiji. How can I supersede
you? It would be completely
improper.’
‘Will somebody answer me or are you two going to keep up this elaborate protocol
forever?’ asked Shiva.
‘Alright, alright,’ laughed Brahaspati. ‘Don’t turn blue all over now.’
‘That is hilarious Brahaspati,’ smiled Shiva. ‘Keep this up and you might actually get
someone to laugh in a hundred years.’
As Brahaspati and Shiva chortled, Sati was astounded at the inappropriate manner in
which the conversation was going on. But if the revered chief scientist seemed
comfortable, she would not say anything. And in any case, how could she reprimand
Shiva? Her code of honour forbade it. He had saved her life. Twice.
‘Well, you are right about Lord Manu being the Father,’ said Brahaspati. ‘He is
considered the progenitor of our civilisation by all the people of India.’
‘Including Swadweepans?’
asked Shiva incredulously.
‘Yes, we believe so. In any case, Lord Manu lived more than eight and a half thousand
years before the present day. He was apparently a prince from south India. A land way
beyond the Narmada river, where the earth ends and the great ocean begins. That land
is the Sangamtamil.’
‘Sangamtamil?’
‘Yes. Sangamtamil was then the richest and most powerful country in the world. Lord
Manu’s family, the Pandyas, had ruled that land for many generations. However, from
the records left by Lord Manu, we know that by his time the kings had lost their old code
of honour. Having fallen on corrupt ways, they spent their days in the pleasures of their
fabulous wealth rather than being focused on their duties and their spiritual life. Then a
terrible calamity occurred. The seas rose and destroyed their entire civilisation.’
‘My God!’ exclaimed Shiva.
‘Lord Manu knew that this day would come and had in fact prepared for it. He believed it
was the decadence his old country had fallen into that had incurred the wrath of the

 gods. Wanting to escape the calamity, he led a band of his followers to the northern,
higher lands in a fleet of ships. He established his first camp at a place called
Mehragarh deep in the western mountains of present day Meluha. Wanting to establish
a moral and just society, he gave up his princely robes and became a priest. In fact the
term for priests in India, pandit, is a derivation of Lord Manu’s family name — Pandya.’
‘Interesting. So how did Lord Manu’s litde band grow into the formidable India we see
today?’
‘The years immediately following their arrival at Mehragarh were harsh on them. With
each year’s monsoon, the flooding and sea tides would become stronger. But after
many years and with the force of Lord Manu’s prayers, the anger of the gods abated
and the waters stopped advancing. The sea, however, never receded to its original
levels.’
‘This means that somewhere in the deep south, the sea still covers the ancient
Sangamtamil cities?’
‘We believe so,’ answered Brahaspati. ‘Once the sea stopped advancing, Lord Manu
and his men came down the mountains. They were shocked to see that the minor
stream of Indus had become a massive river. Many other rivulets across northern India
too had swollen and six great rivers had emerged — Indus, Saraswati, Yamuna, Ganga,
Sarayu and Brahmaputra. Lord Manu said the rivers started flowing because the
temperatures of our land rose with the wrath of the gods. With the rise in temperatures,
huge channels of ice or glaciers frozen high in the Himalayas had started melting,
creating the rivers.’
‘Hmm...’
‘Villages, and later cities, grew on the banks of these rivers. Thus our land of the seven
rivers, Sapt-Sindhu, was born out of the destruction of the Sangamtamil.’
‘Seven? But you mentioned the creation of six rivers in North India.’
‘Yes, that’s true. The seventh river already existed. It is the Narmada and it became our
southern border. Lord Manu strictly forbade his descendants
to go south of the
Narmada. And if they did so, they could never return. This is a law that we believe even
the Chandravanshis adhere to.’
‘So what are Lord Manu’s other laws?’
‘There are numerous laws actually. They are all listed in an extensive treatise called the
Manusmriti. Would you be interested in listening to the entire text?’
‘Tempting,’ smiled Shiva. ‘But I think I’ll pass.’
‘With your permission, my Lords, perhaps we can further discuss Lord Manu’s guidance
of our society over lunch,’ suggested Krittika.

 
At a short distance from the road on which the Neelkanth’s caravan travelled, a small
band of about forty men trudged silently along the Beas. One in two men of the platoon
carried a small coracle on his head. It was typical of this region. The locals made small
and light boats made of bamboo, cane and rope, portable enough to be carried by a
single man on his head. Each boat could ferry two people with relative safety and
speed. At the head of the platoon was a young man with a proud battle scar adorning
his face, his head crowned with a brown turban. A little ahead of him walked a hooded
figure. With his head bowed, his eyes scrunched, he took slow methodical steps, his
mind lost in unfathomable thoughts. His breathing was hard. He brought his hand up
languidly to rub his masked forehead. There was a leather bracelet on his right wrist
with the serpent Aum symbol embroidered on it.
‘Vishwadyumna,’ said the hooded figure. ‘We will enter the river from here. Whenever
we come close to populated areas, we will move away from the river to avoid detection.

 We have to reach Karachapa within two months.’
‘Karachapa, my Lord?’ asked Vishwadyumna surprised. ‘I was under the impression
that we were to have a secret audience with the Queen outside Lothal.’
‘No,’ answered the hooded figure. We will meet her outside Karachapa.’
‘Yes, my Lord,’ answered Vishwadyumna, as he looked back in the direction of the road
to Kotdwaar. He knew that his Lord would have dearly liked to make one more attempt
to kidnap the princess. He also knew that it was foolhardy to endeavour to do so
considering the strength of the force accompanying the caravan. In any case, they were
behind schedule for their main mission. They had to meet the Queen urgently.
Turning towards one of his soldiers, Vishwadyumna ordered, ‘Sriktaa, place your
coracle in the river and give me your oar. I will row the Lord through this part of the
journey’
Sriktaa immediately did as instructed. Vishwadyumna and the hooded figure were the
first of the platoon to enter the river. Vishwadyumna had already started rowing as his
men started placing their boats into the waters. At a distance further down the river, the
hooded figure saw two women lounging carelessly on a boat. One of the women was
sloppily splashing water from the side of the boat on to her friend who was making a
hopeless attempt to avoid getting wet. Their childish game caused their boat to sway
dangerously from side to side. The hooded figure saw that the women had not detected
a crocodile that had entered the river from the opposite bank. Having spied what must
have looked like an appetising meal, the crocodile was swimming swiftly towards the
women’s boat.
‘Look behind you!’ shouted the hooded figure to the women, as he motioned to
Vishwadyumna to row rapidly in their direction.
The women could not hear him from the distance. What they did see, however, was two
men were rowing towards them. They could see one of them was almost a giant
covered from head to toe in a strange robe, his face covered with a mask. This man
was making frantic gestures. Behind the duo were a large number of soldiers swiftly
pushing their boats on to the river. That was all the warning the women needed.
Thinking that the men were coming towards them with evil intent, the women put all
their effort behind the oar and started hastily rowing away from the hooded figure’s boat.
Into the path of the crocodile.
‘No!’ shouted the hooded figure.
He grabbed the oar from Vishwadyumna, using his powerful arms to row rapidly. He
was shortening the distance between them and the women. But not fast enough. The
crocodile closed in on the women’s boat and diving underwater charged at the craft,
rocking it with its massive body. The tiny vessel tilted and capsized, throwing the
women into the Beas.
Screams of terror rent the air as the women fought to stay afloat. The crocodile had
moved too far ahead in its dash. Turning around, it swam towards the struggling
women. The delay of those crucial seconds proved fateful for the women. The rescue
boat arrived between the crocodile and them. Turning towards Vishwadyumna, the
hooded figure ordered, ‘Save the women.’
Before Vishwadyumna could react, he had flung his robe aside and dived into the river.
With his knife held tight between his teeth, he swam towards the advancing crocodile.
Vishwadyumna
pulled one of the women into the boat. She had already lost
consciousness. Turning to the other woman, he reassured, ‘I am coming back soon.’
Vishwadyumna turned and paddled vigorously towards the bank. On the way he passed
some of his other soldiers. ‘Row quickly. The Lord’s life is in danger.’
The other soldiers paddled towards the area where the hooded figure had dived into the
river. The water had turned red with blood from the battle raging under water. The
soldiers said a silent prayer to LordVarun, the god of the water and the seas,
hoping

 that the blood did not belong to their Lord.
One of the soldiers was about to jump into the water with his sword when the hooded
figure emerged onto the surface, soaked in blood. It was that of the crocodile. He swam
forcefully towards the other woman who was on the verge of losing consciousness.
Reaching her in the nick of time, he pulled her head out of the water. Meanwhile, two of
the Chandravanshi soldiers dived off their coracle.
‘My Lord, please get into the boat,’ said one of them. ‘We will swim ashore.’
‘Help the woman first,’ replied the hooded figure.
The soldiers pulled the unconscious woman on to the coracle. The hooded figure then
carefully climbed aboard and rowed towards the shore. By the time the hooded figure
reached the river bank, the other woman had been revived by Vishwadyumna. She sat
disoriented at the rapid chain of events.
‘Are you alright?’ Vishwadyumna asked the woman.
In answer, the woman looked beyond Vishwadyumna and screamed. Vishwadyumna
turned around. On the river bank, the hooded figure was coming ashore carrying the
other woman’s limp body. His clothes were glued to his massive body. To the
disoriented woman, the crocodile’s blood all over his clothes, seemed like that of her
friend.
‘What have you done, you beast?’ shrieked the woman.
The Naga looked up abruptly. His eyes showed mild surprise. He, however, refrained
from saying anything. He gently laid the unconscious woman on the ground. As he did
so, the mask on his face came undone. The woman next to Vishwadyumna stared at
him with horror.
‘Naga!’ she screeched.
Before Vishwadyumna could react, she leapt to her feet and fled screaming, ‘Help!
Help! A Naga is eating my friend!’
The Naga looked at the fleeing woman with melancholic eyes. He shut the windows to
his tormented soul and shook his head slightly. Vishwadyumna meanwhile turned to see
his Lord’s face for the first time in years. He immediately lowered his gaze, but not
before he had seen the rare emotion of intense pain and sorrow in his Lord’s normally
expressionless
eyes. Seething in anger, Vishwadyumna drew his sword, swearing to
slay the ungrateful wench he had just saved.
‘No, Vishwadyumna,’ ordered the Naga. Pulling his mask back on, he turned to his other
soldiers. ‘Revive her.’
‘My Lord,’ argued Vishwadyumna. ‘Her friend will bring others here. Let’s leave this
woman to her fate and go.’
‘No.’
‘But my Lord, someone may come soon. We must escape.’
‘Not till we’ve saved her,’ said the Naga, in his usual calm voice.

 
The royal party, including Nandi and Veerbhadra, were sitting together enjoying their
lunch in the courtyard of the rest-house they had stopped at. Half the brigade too was
eating their meal. They needed all the energy they could gather to march in this
scorching heat. Parvateshwar had come in to check on the food arrangements. He was
especially concerned about Sati’s comfort. However, he had refused to join them. He
was going to eat later with his soldiers.
A loud commotion from the area of one of the perimeter guards disturbed Shiva. He got
up to investigate, motioning to Brahaspati, Nandi and Veerbhadra to remain seated.
Parvateshwar too had heard the racket and was moving towards the uproar.
‘Please save her!’ cried the woman. ‘A Naga is eating her alive!’

 ‘I am sorry,’ answered the captain. ‘But we have strict orders. We are not to leave the
vicinity of this rest-house under any circumstances.’
‘What is the matter?’ asked Parvateshwar.
Turning in surprise, the captain saluted and bowed low.
‘My Lord,’ said the captain. ‘This woman alleges that a Naga has attacked her friend.
She’s asking us to help her.’
Parvateshwar looked at the woman intensely. He would have liked nothing more than to
chase the Naga party and destroy them. But his orders were crystal clear. He was not to
leave the Neelkanth and Sati. Their protection was the only objective of the brigade. But
he was a Kshatriya. What kind of Kshatriya would he be if he didn’t fight to protect the
weak? Seething at the restrictions forced upon him, Parvateshwar was about to say
something when Shiva appeared.
‘What’s the matter?’ asked Shiva.
‘My Lord,’ said the captain in awe. He could not believe that he was actually getting a
chance to converse with the Neelkanth. This woman claims that her friend has been
attacked by Nagas. We are concerned that it may be a trap. We have heard about the
Chandravanshi duplicity on the Mount Mandar road.’
Shiva heard his inner voice cry. ‘Go backl Help her!’
Drawing his sword in one smooth motion he told the woman, ‘Take me to your friend.’
Parvateshwar looked at Shiva with respect. It was mild, but it was respect all the same.
He immediately drew his own sword and turned to the captain, ‘Follow us with your
platoon. Brigadier Vraka, put the entire brigade on alert for any surprise attack. The
princess must be kept safe at all costs!’
Shiva and Parvateshwar ran behind the woman who seemed to lead them with ease.
She was obviously a local. The captain trailed them with his platoon of thirty soldiers.
After sprinting for the larger part of half an hour, they finally reached the riverside to find
a dazed woman sitting on the ground. With heavy breaths, she was staring in shock at
an imaginary vision in the distance. There was blood all over her clothes, but strangely,
no injury to her. There were many footsteps that appeared to be coming out of the river
and going back in.
The captain looked at the woman who had led them here with suspicious eyes. Turning
to his soldiers, he ordered, ‘Form a perimeter around the General and the Neelkanth. It
could be a trap.’
‘She was being eaten alive, I tell you,’ screeched the woman, absolutely stunned to see
her friend alive and unharmed.
‘No she wasn’t,’ said Shiva calmly. He pointed at the corpse of the crocodile floating in
the river. A large flock of crows had settled on the carcass, fighting viciously over its
entrails. ‘Somebody just saved her from that crocodile.’
‘Whoever it was has rowed across the river, my Lord,’ said the captain, pointing towards
the heavy footmarks close to the river.
‘Why would a Naga risk his own life to save this woman?’ asked Shiva.
Parvateshwar seemed as surprised. This was completely unlike the usual blood thirsty
Nagas they had dealt with till now.
‘My Lords,’ said the captain, addressing both Shiva and Parvateshwar. ‘The women
appear safe. Perhaps it is not wise for everybody to stay here. If I have your permission,
I will escort these women back to their village and rejoin the caravan at Kotdwaar. You
could retire to the rest-house.’
‘All right,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘Take four soldiers with you just in case.’
Both Shiva and Parvateshwar walked back, baffled by this bizarre event.

 

 It was late in the evening. Shiva, Brahaspati, Nandi and Veerbhadra sat quietly around
the camp fire. Shiva turned to see Sad sitting at a distance, on the rest-house veranda,
along with Ayurvati and Krittika, having a serious conversation. Parvateshwar as usual,
moved among his soldiers, personally supervising the security arrangements of the
camp and the comfort of his boys.
‘It’s ready, Shiva,’ said Veerbhadra, handing over the chillum to the Neelkanth.
Shiva brought the pipe up to his lips and pulled hard. He relaxed visibly. Feeling the
need for respite, he smoked some more before passing it back to his friend. Veerbhadra
offered it to Brahaspati and Nandi, who both declined. Brahaspati stared at Shiva who
kept stealing glances at Sati. He smiled and shook his head.
‘What?’ asked Shiva who had noticed Brahaspati’s gesture.
‘I understand your longing, my friend,’ whispered Brahaspati. ‘But what you are hoping
for is quite difficult. Almost impossible.’
‘When it’s so valuable, it can’t be easy. Can it?’
Brahaspati smiled and patted Shiva on his hand.
Veerbhadra knew what his friend needed. Dance and music. It always improved his
mood. ‘Don’t people sing and dance in this wretched country.’
‘Private Veerbhadra,’ said Nandi, his tone different with a subordinate, ‘firstly, this
country is not wretched. It’s the greatest land in the world.’
Veerbhadra playfully put his hands together in a mock apology.
‘Secondly,’ continued Nandi, ‘we dance only when an occasion demands it, like the Holi
festival or a public performance.’
‘But the greatest joy of dancing is when you do it for no reason at all, Captain,’ said
Veerbhadra.
‘I agree,’ said Shiva.
Nandi immediately fell silent.
Without any warning, Veerbhadra suddenly burst out into one of the folk songs of his
region. Shiva smiled at his friend, for Veerbhadra was singing one of his favourites.
Continuing to sing, Veerbhadra rose slowly and began dancing to the lilting tune, now
accompanied by Shiva. The combination of marijuana and dance immediately changed
his mood.
Brahaspati stared at Shiva, first in shock and then with pleasure. He noticed a pattern in
their dancing, a smooth six-step combination repeated rhythmically. Shiva reached out
and pulled Brahaspati and Nandi to their feet. They joined in, tentative at first. But it was
only a matter of time before a reluctant Brahaspati was dancing with abandon. The
group moved together in a circle around the fire, the singing louder and livelier.
Shiva suddenly darted out of the ring towards Sati. ‘Dance with me.’
A flabbergasted Sati shook her head.
‘Oh come on! If you can dance while your Guruji and I watch, why not here?’
‘That was forknowledge!’
said Sati.
‘So? Is it wrong if we’re not dancing for knowledge?’
‘I didn’t say that.’
‘Fine. Have it your way,’ said Shiva with a frustrated gesture. ‘Ayurvati, come!’
A starded Ayurvati didn’t know how to react. Before she could decide on a course of
action, Shiva held her hand and pulled her into the circle. Veerbhadra lured Krittika in as
well. The group danced boisterously and sang loudly, making a racket in an otherwise
quiet night. Sati got up, clearly agitated, glared at Shiva’s back and ran into the resthouse. Shiva’s anger rose even higher as he noticed her absence when he turned
towards the veranda.
Damn!
He got back to his dance, his heart in a strange mixture of pain and joy. He turned once
again towards the veranda. There was nobody.

 Who’s behind that curtain?
Shiva was dragged into the next move by Veerbhadra. It was a few moments later that
Shiva was in a position to look again at the veranda. He could see Sati, outlined behind
the curtain, staring at him. Only at him.
Wow!
A surprised and delighted Shiva swung back into his dance, moving in his prime form.
He had to impress her!

  
CHAPTER 13
Blessings of the Impure
 
Kotdwaar was in all its glory to receive the Neelkanth. Torches had been lit across the
fort perimeter as if it was Diwali. Red and blue pennants, embellished with the
Suryavanshi Sun, had been hung down the fort walls. In a rare breach of protocol, the
governor had come outside the city to personally receive the Neelkanth. After the formal
exhibition of the Neelkanth for the Kotdwaar elite at the local court, a public function had
been organised the following day. Sixty-five thousand people, practically the entire
population of Kotdwaar, had converged for the event. Considering the vast number of
attendees, the event had been organised outside the city platform to ensure that every
person could be accommodated.
A speech by Shiva convinced the Kotdwaarans that Meluha’s days of trouble were soon
to end. The remarkable effect Shiva seemed to have on the people was a revelation to
him. Though he was careful with his words, telling them that he would do all he could to
support the people of Meluha, the public made their own interpretations.
‘The cursed Chandravanshis will finally be destroyed,’ said one man.
‘We don’t have to worry about anything now. The Neelkanth will take care of
everything,’ said a woman.
Seated with Brahaspati and Sati on the speaker’s platform, Parvateshwar was deeply
unhappy at the public’s reaction. Turning to the chief scientist, he said, ‘Our entire
society is based on laws and we are not supposed to blindly follow anyone. We are
expected to solve our problems ourselves and not hope for miracles from a solitary
man. What has this man done to deserve such blind faith?’
‘Parvateshwar,’ said Brahaspati politely, for he greatly respected him. ‘I think Shiva is a
good man. I think he cares enough to want to do something. And aren’t good intentions
the first step towards any good deed?’
Parvateshwar didn’t completely agree. Never a believer in the legend of the Neelkanth,
the general thought that every man or woman had to earn his station in life with training
and preparation, not just get it on a silver platter because of a blue throat. ‘Yes, that may
be true. But intentions aren’t enough. They have to be backed by ability as well. Here
we are, putting an untrained man on a pedestal and acting as though he is our saviour.
For all we know, he might lead us to complete disaster. We are acting on faith. Not logic
or laws or even experience.’
‘Sometimes one needs a little bit of faith when faced with a difficult situation. Rational
answers don’t always work. We also need a miracle.’
‘You’re talking about miracles? A scientist?’
‘You can have scientific miracles too, Parvateshwar,’ smiled Brahaspati.
Parvateshwar was distracted by the sight of Shiva stepping off the platform. As he came
down there was a surge of people wanting to touch his hand. The soldiers, led by Nandi
and Veerbhadra, were holding them back. There was one blind man amongst them who
looked like he might be injured in the melee.
‘Nandi, let that man through,’ said Shiva.
Nandi and Veerbhadra lowered the rope to let him in.
Another man shouted, ‘I am his son. He needs me to guide him.’
‘Let him in as well,’ said Shiva.
The son rushed in and held his father’s hand. The blind man, who seemed lost without

 his son’s hand, smiled warmly as he recognised the familiar touch. He was led close to
Shiva and the son said, ‘Father, the Neelkanth is right in front of you. Can you sense his
presence?’
Copious tears flowed from the blind man’s eyes. Without thinking, he bent down to try
and touch Shiva’s feet. His son cried out in shock as he pulled the man back sharply.
‘Father!’ scolded the son.
Shiva was stunned by the harshness in the son’s tone compared to the loving manner in
which he had spoken so far. ‘What happened?’
‘I am sorry, my Lord,’ apologised the son. ‘He didn’t mean to. He just lost control due to
your presence.’
‘I am sorry, my Lord,’ said the blind man, his tears flowing stronger.
‘Sorry for what?’
‘He is a vikarma, my Lord,’ said his son, ‘ever since disease blinded him twenty years
ago. He should not have tried to touch you.’
Sati, who was now standing near Shiva, had heard the entire conversation. She felt
sympathy for the blind man. She knew the torment of having even your touch
considered impure. But what he had tried to do was illegal.
‘I am sorry, my Lord,’ continued the blind man. ‘But please don’t let your anger with me
stop you from protecting our country. It is the greatest land that Parmatma
created.
Save it from the evil Chandravanshis. Save us, my Lord.’
The blind man continued to cry folding his hands in a penitent namaste. Shiva was
shaken by the dignity of the blind man.
He still loves a country that treats him so unfairly. Why 1 ? Even worse he doesn’t even
appear to think he’s being treated unfairly.
Tears welled up in Shiva’s eyes as he realised that he was looking at a man whom fate
had been very unkind to.
I will stop this nonsense.
Shiva stepped forward and bent down. The flabbergasted son trembled in disbelief as
he saw the Neelkanth touch the feet of his vikarma father. The blind man was at sea for
a moment. When he did understand what the Neelkanth had done, his hand shot up to
cover his mouth in shock.
Shiva rose and stood in front of the blind man. ‘Bless me, sir, so that I find the strength
to fight for a man as patriotic as you.’
The blind man stood dumb-struck. His tears dried up in his bewilderment. He was about
to collapse when Shiva took a quick step forward to hold him, lest he fall to the ground.
The blind man found the strength to say, ‘Vijayibhav’. May you be victorious .
The son caught hold of his father’s limp body as Shiva released him. The entire crowd
was stunned into silence by what the Neelkanth had done. Forget the gravity of
touching a vikarma, the Neelkanth had just asked to be blessed by one. Shiva turned to
see Parvateshwar’s enraged face. Shiva had broken the law. Broken it brazenly and in
public. Next to him stood Sati. Her face, her eyes, her entire demeanour expressionless.
What the hell is she thinking?

 
Brahaspati and Sati entered Shiva’s chambers as soon as he was alone. Shiva’s smile
at seeing his two favourite people in the world disappeared on hearing Sati’s voice, ‘You
must get a shudhikaran done.’
He looked at her and answered simply, ‘No.’
‘No? What do you mean no?’
‘I mean No. Nahin. Nako,’ said Shiva, adding the words for ‘no’ in the Kashmiri and the
Kotdwaar dialect, for good measure.

 ‘Shiva,’ said Brahaspati, keeping his composure. ‘This is no laughing matter. I agree
with Sati. The governor too was worried about your safety and has arranged for a
pandit. He waits outside as we speak. Get the ceremony done now.’
‘But I just said I don’t want to.’
‘Shiva,’ said Sati, reverting to her usual tone. ‘I respect you immensely. Your valour.
Your intelligence. Your talent. But you are not above the law. You have touched a
vikarma. You have to get a shudhikaran. That is the law.’
‘Well if the law says that my touching that poor blind man is illegal, then the law is
wrong!’
Sati was stunned into silence by Shiva’s attitude.
‘Shiva, listen to me,’ argued Brahaspati. ‘Not doing a shudhikaran can be harmful to
you. You are meant for bigger things. You are important to the future of India. Don’t put
your own person at risk out of obstinacy.’
‘It’s not obstinacy. You tell me, honestly, how can it harm me if I happened to touch a
wronged man, who I might add, still loves his country despite the way he has been
ostracised and ill-treated?’
‘He may be a good man Shiva, but the sins of his previous birth will contaminate your
fate,’ said Brahaspati.
‘Then let them! If the weight on that man’s shoulders lessens, I will feel blessed.’
‘What are you saying Shiva?’ asked Sati. ‘Why should you carry the punishment of
someone else’s sins?’
‘Firstly, I don’t believe in the nonsense that he was punished for the sins of his previous
birth. He was just infected by a disease, plain and simple. Secondly, if it is my choice to
carry the weight of someone else’s so called sins, why should it matter to anyone?’
‘It matters because we care about you!’ cried Brahaspati.
‘Come on Sati,’ said Shiva. ‘Don’t tell me you believe in this rubbish.’
‘It is not rubbish.’
‘Look, don’t you want me to fight for you? Stop this unfairness that your society has
subjected you to.’
‘Is that what this is about? Me?’ asked Sati, outraged.
‘No,’ retorted Shiva immediately, then added. ‘Actually yes. This is also about you. It is
about the vikarma and the unfairness that they have to face. I want to save them from
leading the life of an outcast.’
‘I DON’T NEED YOUR PROTECTION! I CANNOT BE SAVED!’ shouted Sati, before
storming out of the room.
Shiva glared at her retreating form in irritation. ‘What the hell is it with this woman?!’
‘She’s right Shiva,’ advised Brahaspati. ‘Don’t go there.’
‘You agree with her on this vikarma business? Answer with your heart, Brahaspati.
Don’t you think it is unfair?’
‘I wasn’t talking about that. I was talking about Sati.’
Shiva continued to glare at Brahaspati defiantly. Everything in his mind, body and soul
told him that he should pursue Sati. That his life would be meaningless without her. That
his soul’s existence would be incomplete without her.
‘Don’t go there, my friend,’ reiterated Brahaspati.

 
The caravan left the river city of Kotdwaar on a royal barge led and followed by two
large boats of equal size and grandeur as the royal vessel. Typical of the Meluhan
security system, the additional boats were to confuse any attacker about which boat the
royal family may be on. The entire royal party was in the second boat. Each of the three
large boats was manned by a brigade of soldiers. Additionally, there were five small and

 quick cutter boats on both sides of the royal convoy, keeping pace and protecting the
sides in case of an ambush.
‘When the monsoon is not active, my Lord,’ said Ayurvati, ‘the rivers are the best way to
travel. Though we have good roads connecting all major cities, it cannot match the
rivers in terms of speed and safety.’
Shiva smiled at Ayurvati politely. He was not in the frame of mind for much
conversation. Sati had not spoken to Shiva since that fateful day at Kotdwaar when he
had refused to undergo a shudhikaran.
The royal barge stopped at many cities along the river. The routine seemed much the
same. Extreme exuberance would manifest itself in each city on the arrival of the
Neelkanth.
It was a kind of reaction unnatural in Meluha. But then, a Neelkanth didn’t grace the
land every day.
‘Why?’ asked Shiva of Brahaspati, after many days of keeping quiet about the disquiet
in his troubled heart.
‘Why what?’
‘You know what I am talking about, Brahaspati,’ said Shiva, narrowing his eyes in
irritation.
‘She genuinely believes that she deserves to be a vikarma,’ answered Brahaspati with a
sad smile.
‘Why?’
‘Perhaps because of the manner in which she became a vikarma.’
‘How did it happen?’
‘It happened during her earlier marriage.’
‘What! Sati was married?!’
’Yes. That was around ninety years back. It was a political marriage with one of the
noble families of the empire. Her husband’s name was Chandandhwaj.
She got
pregnant and went to the Maika to deliver the child. It was the monsoon season.
Unfortunately, the child was stillborn.’
‘Oh my god!’ said Shiva, empathising with the pain Sati must have felt.
‘But it was worse. On the same day, her husband, who had gone to the Narmada to
pray for the safe birth of their child, accidentally drowned. On that cursed day, her life
was destroyed.’
Shiva stared at Brahaspati, too stunned to react. ‘She became a widow and was
declared a vikarma the same day.’
‘But how can the husband’s death be considered her fault?’ argued Shiva. ‘That is
completely ridiculous.’
‘She wasn’t declared a vikarma because of her husband’s death. It was because she
gave birth to a stillborn child.’
‘But that could be due to any reason. Maybe there was a mistake that the local doctors
committed.’
‘That doesn’t happen in Meluha, Shiva,’ said Brahaspati calmly. ‘Having a stillborn child
is probably one of the worst ways for a woman to become a vikarma. Only giving birth to
a Naga child would be considered worse. Thank god that didn’t happen. Because then
she would have been completely ostracised from society.’
‘This has to be changed. The concept of vikarma is unfair.’
Brahaspati looked at his friend intensely. ‘You might save the vikarma, Shiva. But how
do you save a woman who doesn’t want to be saved? She genuinely believes she
deserves this punishment.’
‘Why? I’m sure she is not the first Meluhan woman to give birth to a stillborn. There
must have been others before her. There will be many more after her.’
‘She was the first royal woman to give birth to a stillborn. Her fate has been a source of

 embarrassment to the emperor. It raises questions about his ancestry’
‘How would it raise questions about his lineage? Sati is not his birth daughter. She
would also have come from Maika, right?’
‘No, my friend. That law was relaxed for families of nobility around two hundred and fifty
years back. Apparently in the ‘national interest”, noble families were allowed to keep
their birth-children. Some laws can be amended, provided ninety per cent of the
Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas above a particular chosen-tribe and job status vote
for the change. There have been rare instances of such unanimity. This was one of
them. Only one man opposed this change.’
‘Who?’
‘Lord Satyadhwaj, the grandfather of Parvateshwar. Their family had vowed not to have
any birth children since this law was passed. Parvateshwar honours that promise to this
day.’
‘But if the birth law could be changed,’ said Shiva working things out, ‘why couldn’t the
law of vikarma?’
‘Because there aren’t enough noble families affected by that law. That is the harsh
truth.’
‘But all this goes completely against Lord Ram’s teachings!’
‘Lord Ram’s teachings also say that the concept of the vikarma is correct. Don’t you
want to question that?’
Shiva glanced at Brahaspati silently, before looking out over the river.
There is nothing wrong with questioning Lord Ram’s laws, my friend,’ said Brahaspati.
‘There were many times when he himself stood down because of someone else’s
rationale. The question is that what are your motives for wanting to change the law? Is it
because you genuinely think the law itself is unfair? Or is it because you are attracted to
Sati and you want to remove an inconvenient law which stands in your path.’
‘I genuinely think the vikarma law is unfair. I felt that from the moment I found out about
it. Even before I knew Sati was a vikarma.’
‘But Sati doesn’t think the law is unfair.’
‘But she is a good woman. She doesn’t deserve to be treated this way.’
‘She is not just a good woman. She is one of the finest I have ever met. She is beautiful,
honest, straight-forward, brave and intelligent — everything a man could want in a
woman. But you are not just any man. You are the Neelkanth.’
Shiva turned around and rested his hands on the craft’s railing. He looked into the
distance at the dense forest along the riverbanks as their boat glided across the water.
The soothing evening breeze fanned Shiva’s long locks.
‘I’ve told you before, my friend,’ said Brahaspati. ‘Because of that unfortunate blue
throat, every decision you take has many ramifications. You have to think many times
before you act.’

 
It was late in the night. The royal convoy had just set sail from the city of Sutgengarh on
the Indus. The emotions at Sutgengarh had erupted in the now predictable routine of
exuberance at the sight of the Neelkanth. The saviour of their civilisation had finally
arrived.
Their saviour, however, was in his own private hell. Sati had maintained her distance
from Shiva for the last few weeks. He was torn, experiencing pain and dismay at depths
he didn’t think fathomable.
The convoy’s next stop was the famous city of Mohan Jo Daro or the Platform of
Mohan . The city, on the mighty Indus, was dedicated to a great philosopher-priest called
Lord Mohan, who lived in this region many thousands of years ago. Once he had met

 with the people of Mohan Jo Daro, Shiva expressed a desire to visit the temple of Lord
Mohan. This temple stood outside the main city platform, further down the Indus. The
governor of Mohan Jo Daro had offered to take the Lord Neelkanth there in a grand
procession. Shiva however insisted on going alone. He felt drawn to the temple. He felt
that it would have some solutions for his troubled heart.
The temple itself was simple. Much like Lord Mohan himself. A small non—descript
structure announced itself as the birthplace of the sage. The only sign of the temple’s
significance was the massive gates in the four cardinal directions of the compound. As
instructed by Shiva, Nandi and Veerbhadra, along with their platoon, waited outside.
Shiva, with his comforting cravat back around his neck, walked up the steps feeling
tranquil after a long time. He rang the bell at the entrance and sat down against a pillar
with his eyes shut in quiet contemplation. Suddenly, an oddly familiar voice asked: ‘How
are you, my friend?’

  
CHAPTER 14
Pandit of Mohan Jo Daro
 
Shiva opened his eyes to behold a man who was almost a replica of the pandit he had
met at the Brahma temple, in what seemed like another life. He sported a similar long
flowing white beard and a big white mane. He wore a saffron dhoti and angvastram. The
wizened face bore a calm and welcoming smile. If it wasn’t for this pandit’s much taller
frame, Shiva could have easily mistaken him for the one he had met at the Brahma
temple.
‘How are you, my friend?’ repeated the pandit sitting down.
‘I am alright, Panditji,’ said Shiva, using the Indian term ‘ji’ as a form of respect. He
couldn’t follow why, but the intrusion was welcome to him. It almost seemed as though
he was drawn to this temple because he was destined to meet the pandit. ‘Do all
pandits in Meluha look alike?’
The man smiled warmly. ‘Not all the pandits. Just us.’
‘And who might “;us” be, Panditji?’
‘The next time you meet one of us, we will tell you,’ said the Pandit cryptically. ‘That is a
promise.’
‘Why not now?’
‘At this point of time, our identity is not important,’ smiled the Pandit. What is important
is that you are disturbed about something. Do you want to talk about it?’
Shiva took a deep breath. Gut instinct told him that he could trust this man.
‘There is this task that I supposedly have to do for Meluha.’
‘I know. Though I wouldn’t dismiss the Neelkanth’s role as a “task”. He does much more
than that.’ Pointing at Shiva’s throat, the Pandit continued, ‘Pieces of cotton cannot
cover divine brilliance.’
Shiva looked up with a wry smile. ‘Well, Meluha does seem like a wonderful society.
And I want to do all I can to protect it from evil.’
‘Then what is the problem?’
‘The problem is that I find some grossly unfair practices in this nearly perfect society.
And this is inconsistent with the ideals that Meluha aspires to.’
‘What practices are you referring to?’ asked the Pandit.
‘For example, the way the vikarma are treated.’
‘Why is it unfair?’
‘How can anyone be sure that these people committed sins in their previous birth? And
that their present sufferings are a result of that? It might be sheer bad luck. Or a random
act of nature.’
‘You’re right. It could be. But do you think that the fate of the vikarma is about them
personally?’
‘Isn’t it?’
‘No it isn’t,’ explained the Pandit. ‘It is about the society as a whole. The vikarma
acceptance of their fate is integral to the stability of Meluha.’
Shiva frowned.
‘What any successful society needs, O Neelkanth, is flexibility with stability. Why would
you need flexibility? Because every single person has different dreams and capabilities.
The birth son of a warrior could have the talent to be a great businessman. Then society
needs to be flexible enough to allow this son to change his vocation from his father’s

 profession. Flexibility in a society allows change, so that all its members have the space
to discover their true selves and grow to their potential. And if every person in a society
achieves his true potential, society as a whole also achieves its true potential.’
‘I agree.’
But what does this have to do with the vikarma?
‘I’ll come to the obvious question in a bit. Just bear with me,’ said the Pandit. ‘If we
believe that flexibility is key to a successful society, the Maika system is designed to
achieve it in practice. No child knows what the professions of his birth-parents are. They
are independent to pursue what their natural talent inspires them to do.’
‘I agree. The Maika system is almost breathtakingly fair. A person can credit or blame
only himself
for what he does with his life. Nobody else. But this is about flexibility.
What about stability?’
‘Stability allows a person the freedom of choice, my friend. People can pursue their
dreams only when they are living in a society where survival is not a daily threat. In a
society without security and stability, there are no intellectuals or businessmen or artists
or geniuses. Man is constantly in fight or flight mode. Nothing better than an animal.
Where is the chance then to allow ideas to be nurtured or dreams to be pursued? That
is the way all humans were before we formed societies. Civilisation is very fragile. All it
takes is a few decades of chaos for us to forget humanity and turn into animals. Our
base natures can take over very fast. We can forget that we are sentient beings, with
laws and codes and ethics.’
‘I understand. The tribes in my homeland were no better than animals. They didn’t even
want to live a better life!’
‘They didn’t know a better life was possible, Neelkanth. That is the curse of constant
strife. It makes us forget the most beautiful part of being human. That is why society
must remain stable so that we don’t put each other in a situation of having to fight for
survival.’
‘All right. But why would letting people achieve their potential cause instability? In fact, it
should make people happier with their lives and hence society would become
increasingly steady.’
‘True, but only partially. People are happy when they change their lives for the better.
But there are two situations in which change can lead to chaos. First, when people face
a change by others, situations that they cannot understand. This scares them almost as
much as the fear of death. When change happens too fast, they resist it.’
‘Yes, change forced by others is difficult to accept.’
‘And too rapid a change causes instability. That is the bedrock of Lord Ram’s way of life.
There are laws which help a society change slowly and allow it to remain stable. At the
same time, it allows its citizens the freedom to follow their dreams. He created an ideal
balance of stability and flexibility.’
‘You mentioned a second situation...’
‘The second is when people cannot make the transition they want to improve their lives
for reasons beyond their control. Say there is an exceptional warrior who loses his
hand-eye coordination due to a disease. He is still a fighter, but not extraordinary any
more. The odds are that he will be frustrated about what he perceives as injustice
meted out to him. He is likely to blame his doctor, or even society at large. Many such
discontented people can become a threat to society as a whole.’
Shiva frowned. He didn’t like the logic. But he also knew that one of the main reasons
the Pakratis had rejected the peace offer by his uncle years ago was because their
diseased and old chief was desperate to live up to his initial reputation of being an
exceptional warrior who could have defeated the Gunas.
‘Their combined rage can lead to unrest, even violence,’ said the Pandit. ‘Lord Ram
sensed that. And that is why the concept of Vikarma came into being. If you make a

 person believe that his misfortune in this birth is due to his sins in his previous birth, he
will resign himself to his fate and not vent his fury on society at large.’
‘But I disagree that ostracising the vikarma can work. It would lead to more suppressed
anger.’
‘But they are not ostracised. Their living is subsidised by the government. They can still
interact with family members. They are allowed to gain personal excellence in their
chosen fields, wherever possible. They can also fight to protect themselves. What they
can’t do is ever be in a position to influence others. And this system has worked for one
thousand years. Do you know how common rebellion was in India before Lord Ram
created this empire? And most of the times, the rebellions were not led by farsighted
men who thought they would create a better way of life for the common man. They were
led by men discontented with their lot in life. People very much like the vikarma. And
these rebellions usually caused chaos and decades went by before order was restored.’
‘So are you saying that anyone who is frustrated with life should simply resign himself to
being a vikarma,’ said Shiva.
‘Why?’
‘For the larger good of society’
Shiva was aghast. He could not believe what he was hearing. He deeply disliked the
arguments being presented to him. ‘I am sorry, but I think this system is completely
unfair. I have heard that almost one twentieth of the people in Meluha are vikarma. Are
you going to keep so many people as outcast forever? This system needs to change.’
‘You can change it. You are the Neelkanth. But remember, no system is absolutely
perfect. In Lord Ram’s time, a lady called Manthara triggered a series of events which
led to the loss of millions of lives. She had suffered terribly due to her physical
deformities. And then, fate put her in a position of influence over a powerful queen and
thus over the entire kingdom. Therefore, the karma of one maladjusted victim of fate led
to the mass destruction that followed. Would it not have been better for everybody if this
person had been declared a vikarma? There are no easy answers. Having said that,
maybe you are right. Maybe there are so many vikarma now that it can lead to a tipping
point, tumble society into chaos. Do I have the solution to this problem? No. Maybe you
could find it.’
Shiva turned his face away. He believed in his heart that the vikarma system was unfair.
‘Are you concerned about all the vikarma, O Neelkanth?’ asked the Pandit. ‘Or just one
in particular?’

 
‘What is the Lord doing in there?’ asked Nandi. ‘He is taking too long.’
‘I don’t know,’ said Veerbhadra. ‘All I know is that if Shiva says he needs to do
something, I accept it.’
‘Why do you call the Lord by his name?’
‘Because that is his name!’
Nandi smiled at the simple answer and turned to look at the temple.
‘Tell me Captain,’ said Veerbhadra coming close to Nandi. ‘Is Krittika spoken for?’
‘Spoken for?’
‘I mean,’ continued Veerbhadra. ‘Is she off limits?’
‘Off limits?’
‘You know what I mean,’ said Veerbhadra turning beet red. ‘She is a widow,’ said Nandi.
‘Her husband died fifteen years back.’
‘Oh, that’s terrible!’
‘Yes, it is,’ said Nandi, as he smiled at Veerbhadra. ‘But to answer your question, she is
“not spoken for” right now.’

  
‘My Lady, may I say something?’ asked Krittika.
Sati turned from the guest-room window to look at Krittika with a surprised frown. ‘Have
I ever stopped you from speaking your mind? A true Suryavanshi always speaks her
mind.’
‘Well,’ said Krittika. ‘Sometimes, it may not be that harmful to lose control of yourself.’
Sati frowned even more.
Krittika spoke quickly, before her courage deserted her. ‘Forget about him being the
Neelkanth, my Lady. Just as a man, I think he is the finest I have seen. He is intelligent
and brave, funny and kind, and worships the ground you walk on. Is that really so bad?’
Sati glared at Krittika; she didn’t know if she was more upset at Krittika for what she was
saying or at herself for having feelings which were apparently so evident.
Krittika continued, ‘Maybe, just maybe, breaking the rules can lead to happiness.’
‘I am a Suryavanshi,’ said Sati, her voice dropping. ‘Rules are all that I live by. What
have I got to do with happiness? Don’t ever dare to speak to me about this again!’

 
‘Yes, there is this particular vikarma,’ admitted Shiva. ‘But that is not why I think the
vikarma law is unfair.’
‘I know that,’ said the Pandit. ‘But I also know that what troubles you right now is your
relationship with that one in particular. You don’t want her to think that you would
change the law, however justified, just to get her. Because if Sati believes that, she will
never come to you.’
‘How do you know her name?’ asked Shiva, flabbergasted.
‘We know many things, my friend.’
‘My entire life is meaningless without her.’
‘I know,’ smiled the Pandit. ‘Perhaps I can help you.’
Shiva frowned. This was unexpected.
‘You want her to reciprocate your love. But how can she when you don’t even
understand her?’
‘I think I understand her. I love her.’
‘Yes, you do love her. But you don’t understand her. You don’t know what she wants.’
Shiva kept quiet. He knew the Pandit was right. He was thoroughly confused about Sati.
‘You can hazard a guess towards what she wants,’ continued the Pandit, ‘with the help
of the theory of transactions.’
What?’ asked a flummoxed Shiva.
‘It makes up the fabric of society.’
‘Excuse me, but what does this have to do with Sati?’
‘Indulge me for a little while, Neelkanth,’ said the Pandit. You know the cloth that you
wear is created when cotton threads are woven together, right?’
‘Yes,’ answered Shiva.
‘Similarly, transactions are threads that when woven together make up a society, its
culture. Or in the case of a person, weaves together their character.’
Shiva nodded.
‘If you want to know the strength of a cloth, you inspect the quality of its weave. If you
want to understand a person’s character, look closely at their interpersonal behaviour or
their transactions.’
‘Alright,’ said Shiva slowly, absorbing the Pandit’s words. ‘But transactions are...’

 ‘I’ll explain,’ interrupted the Pandit. Transactions
are interactions between two
individuals. It could be trading goods, like a Shudra farmer offering grain for money from
a Vaishya. But it could also be beyond material concerns, like a Kshatriya offering
protection to a society in return for power.’
Shiva nodded in agreement. ‘Transactions are about give and take.’
‘Exactly. So going by this logic, if you want something from someone, you have to give
that person something they want.’
‘So what do you think she wants?’ asked Shiva.
‘Try and understand Sati’s transactions. What do you think she wants?’
‘I don’t know. She is very confusing’
‘No, she isn’t. There is a pattern. Think. She is probably the most eminent vikarma in
history. She has the power to rebel if she wants to. She certainly has the spirit since she
never backs off from a fight. But she does not rebel against the vikarma law. Neither
does she fade into the background like most vikarmas and live her life in anonymity.
She follows the commandments, and yet, she does not whine and complain to others.
However unfairly life treats her, she conducts herself with dignity. Why?’
‘Because she is a righteous person?’
‘That she is, no doubt. But that is not the reason. Remember, in a transaction, you give
something because you want something in return. She is accepting an unfair law
without trying to make anyone feel guilty about it. And most importantly, she continues
to use her talents to contribute to the good of society whenever she can. What do you
think a person who is giving all this in her transactions with society wants in return?’
‘Respect,’ answered Shiva.
‘Exactly!’ beamed the Pandit. ‘And what do you think you do when you try to protect
such a person?’ ‘Disrespect her.’
‘Absolutely! I know it comes naturally to you to want to protect any good person who
appears in need. But control that feeling in relation to Sati. Respect her. And she will
feel irresistibly drawn towards you. She gets many things from the people who love her.
What she doesn’t get is what she craves the most — respect.’
Shiva looked at the Pandit with a grateful smile. He had found his answer.
Respect.

 
After two weeks, the Neelkanth’s convoy reached the city of Karachapa at the
confluence of the Indus into the Western Sea. It was a glittering city which had long
grown beyond the one platform it was built on. The Dwitiya or second
platform, had
been erected fifty years ago on an even grander scale than the first. The Dwitiya
platform was where the Karachapa elite lived. The Governor, a diminutive Vaishya
called Jhooleshwar, had heard of and followed the new tradition of receiving the
Neelkanth outside the city.
Karachapa, with its hundred thousand citizens, was at its heart a frontier trading city.
Therefore it was an act of foresight by Lord Brahmanayak, Emperor Daksha’s father, to
have appointed a Vaishya as its governor over a hundred years ago. Jhooleshwar had
ruled the city extraordinarily well, gilding its fate in gold and was considered its wisest
and most efficient governor ever. Karachapa had long overtaken Lothal on the eastern
part of the empire to become Meluha’s premier city of commerce. While foreigners such
as Mesopotamians and Egyptians were allowed into this liberal city, they were not
allowed to travel further into Meluha without express royal permission.
Jhooleshwar escorted the Neelkanth on an excursion to the Western Sea on his very
first day in Karachapa. Shiva had never seen the sea and was fascinated by the near
infinite expanse of water. He spent many hours at the port where Jhooleshwar proudly

 expounded on the various types of ships and vessels manufactured at the shipyard
attached to the Karachapa port. Brahaspati accompanied them to the port to check on
the imports due for him from the Mesopotamian merchants.
At the evening state dinner organised for Shiva, Jhooleshwar proudly announced that a
jagna , a ceremonial
fire sacrifice , was being organised the next day in honour of the
Neelkanth, under the auspices of Lord Varun and the legendary Ashwini Kumar twins.
The Ashwini Kumar twins were celebrated ancient seafarers who had navigated ocean
routes from Meluha to Mesopotamia and beyond. Their maps, guidance and stories
were a source of inspiration and learning for this city of seamen.
After dinner, Shiva visited the chambers where Sati and Krittika were housed.
‘I was wondering,’ said Shiva, still careful with Sati since she had gone back to being
formal with him, ‘will you be coming to the yagna tomorrow?’
‘I am very sorry, Lord Neelkanth,’ said Sati courteously. ‘But it may not be possible for
me to attend the ceremony. I am not allowed to attend such yagnas.’
Shiva was about to say that nobody would question her since she would be attending
with the Neelkanth. But he thought better of it. ‘Perhaps we could have a dance practise
tomorrow? I cannot remember the last time we had a dance session.’
‘That would be nice. I have not had the benefit of your instruction in a long time,’ said
Sati.
Shiva nodded unhappily at Sati — the freeze in their relationship tormented him.
Bidding goodbye, he turned to leave.
Krittika glanced at Sati, shaking her head imperceptibly.

  
CHAPTER 15
Trial by Fire
 
The little boy hurried through a dusty goat trail, trying to avoid the sharp stones,
bundling into his fur coat. The dense, wet forest encroached on the path menacingly. It
was difficult to see beyond the trees lining the narrow path. The boy was sure that there
were terrible monsters lurking in the dense foliage, waiting to pounce on him if he
slowed down. His village was but a few hours away. The sun was fast setting behind the
mountains. Monsters love the darkness — he had heard his mother and grandmother
say repeatedly when he was being difficult. He would have liked being accompanied by
an elder, as monsters didn’t trouble the elders.
His heart skipped a beat as he heard a strange heaving sound. He immediately drew
out his short sword, suspecting an attack from behind. His friends had heard many
stories about the monsters of the forests. The cowards never attackedfrom the front.
He stood still straining to determine the direction of the sound. It had a peculiar
repetitive rhythm and seemed vaguely familiar. He felt as though he had heard it before.
The heaving was now accompanied by a heavy grunting male voice. This was not a
monster! The boy felt excitement run through his body. He had heard his friends
whisper in giggles about it, but never seen the act himself. This was his chancel
He crept slowly into the foliage, his sword dangling by his side. He did not have to go
too far when he came upon the source of the sound. It came from a small clearing. He
bid behind a tree trunk and peeped.
It was a couple. They seemed to be in a hurry. They had not even disrobed completely.
The man was extraordinarily hairy — almost like a bear. The boy could see just his
back from this angle. He had a frontal view of the woman. She was astonishingly
beautiful 1 . Her wavy hair, long and lustrous. The partly torn blouse revealed a firm
breast, with deep red welts due to the brutal intercourse. Her skirt had been ripped and
revealed exquisite long legs. The boy was excited beyond imagination. Wait till his best
friend Bhadra heard of this!
As he enjoyed the show, his disquiet grew. Something seemed amiss. The man was in
the throes of passion while the woman lay passive — almost dead. Her hands lay
lifeless by her side. Her mouth was tightly shut. She was not whispering
encouragements to her lover. Were those tears of ecstasy rolling down her cheeks’? Or
was she being forced? But how could that be? The man’s knife lay within the woman’s
reach. She could have picked up the blade and stabbed him if she wanted.
The boy shook his head. He tried to silence his conscience. ‘Just shut up. Ijet me look.’
And then came the moment that would haunt him for the rest of his life. The woman’s
eyes suddenly fell upon him.
‘HELP!’ she cried out, ‘Please help!’
The startled boy fell back, dropping his sword. The hairy monster turned to see who the
woman was calling. The boy quickly picked up his sword and fled, ignoring the searing
pain on his frost-bitten foot as he ran. He was terrified at the thought that the man was
chasing him. He could hear the man’s heavy breathing.
The boy leapt onto the goat trail and sped towards his village. He could still hear the
heavy breathing. It was drawing closer every second. The boy suddenly swerved to his
left, pivoted and slashed back with his sword.
There was nobody there. No sound of heavy breathing. The only sound was the

 haunting plea of a distraught woman.
‘Help! Please help!’
The little boy looked back. That poor woman.
‘Go back! Help her!’ cried his inner voice.
He hesitated for a moment. Then turned and fled towards his village.
NO! GO BACK! HELP HER!
Shiva woke up sweating, his heart pounding madly. He instinctively turned around,
wanting desperately to go back to that dreadful day. To redeem himself. But there would
be no redemption. The woman’s terrified face came flooding back. He shut his eyes. But
how do you shut your eyes to an image branded on your mind?
He pulled his knees up and rested his head on them. Then he did the only thing that
helped. He cried.

 
The yagna platform had been set up at the central square of the Dwitiya platform. For
Karachapa, it was not the usual austere affair typical of Meluha. The frontier city had
decorated the area with bright colours that vied for attention. The platform itself had
been painted in a bright golden hue. Colourfully decorated poles, festooned with
flowers, held aloft a shamiana , a cloth canopy . Red and blue pennants, with the
Suryavanshi symbol painted on, hung proudly from many poles. The entire atmosphere
was that of pomp and show.
Jhooleshwar received Shiva at the head of the platform and guided him to his ritual seat
at the yagna. At the governor's repeated requests, Shiva had removed his cravat for the
duration of the ceremony. Parvateshwar and Brahaspati sat to the right of the Neelkanth
while Jhooleshwar and Ayurvati sat to his left. Nandi and Veerbhadra had also been
invited to sit behind Shiva. Though this was unorthodox, Jhooleshwar had acceded to
the Neelkanth’s request. Jhooleshwar
governed a cosmopolitan border city and
believed that many of the strict Meluhan laws could be bent slightly for the sake of
expediency. His liberal attitude had made Karachapa a magnet for people from a wide
variety of races and a hub for the exchange of goods, services and ideas.
Shiva looked towards Sati’s balcony, which overlooked the central square in the
distance. Though Sati was not allowed to step on the platform while the yagna was
being conducted, she could look on at the proceedings from the safe distance of her
chambers. Shiva noticed her standing behind the balcony curtain, with Krittika by her
side, observing the proceedings.
As was the custom before such a yagna, the pandit stood up and asked formally, ‘If
anybody here has any objection to this yagna, please speak now. Or forever hold your
peace.’
This was just a traditional question, which wasn’t actually supposed to be answered.
Hence there was an audible, collective groan when a voice cried out loudly, ‘I object’
Nobody needed to look to recognise where the voice came from. It was Tarak, an
immigrant from the ultra-conservative northwest regions of the empire. Since Tarak had
come to Karachapa, he had taken it upon himself to be the ‘moral police’ of this
‘decadent city of sin’.
Shiva strained his neck to see who had objections. He saw Tarak standing at the back,
at the edge of the puja platform, very close to Sati’s balcony. He was a giant of a man
with a fair face cut up brutally due to a lifetime of strife, an immense stomach and a
miner’s bulging muscular arms. He cut an awesome figure. It was obvious, without even
looking at his amulets, that Tarak was a Kshatriya who had made his living working in
the lower rungs of the army.
Jhooleshwar glared at Tarak in exasperation. ‘What is it now? This time we have

 ensured that we have not used the white Chandravanshi colours in our decorations. Or
do you think the water being used for the ceremony is not at the correct temperature as
per the Vedas?’
The gathering sniggered. Parvateshwar looked at Jhooleshwar sharply. Before he could
reprimand the Governor for his cavalier reference to the Vedas, Tarak spoke up. ‘The
law says no vikarma should be allowed on the yagna platform.’
‘Yes,’ said Jhooleshwar. ‘And unless you have been declared a vikarma, I don’t think
that law is being broken.’
‘Yes it is!’
There were shocked murmurs from the congregation. Jhooleshwar raised his hand.
‘Nobody is a vikarma here, Tarak,’ said Jhooleshwar. ‘Now please sit down.’
‘Princess Sati defiles the yagna with her presence.’
Shiva and Parvateshwar looked sharply at Tarak. Jhooleshwar was as stunned as the
rest of the assembly by Tarak’s statement. ‘Tarak!’ said Jhooleshwar. ‘You go too far.
Princess Sati is confined in the guest-house, abiding by the laws of the yagna. She is
not present on the yagna platform. Now sit down before I have you whipped.’
‘On what charge will you have me whipped, Governor?’ yelled Tarak. ‘Standing up for
the law is not a crime in Meluha.’
‘But the law has not been broken!’
‘Yes it has. The exact words of the law is that no vikarma can be on the same platform
while a yagna is being conducted. The yagna is being conducted on the Dwitiya
platform of the city. By being on the same platform, the princess defiles the yagna.’
Tarak was technically correct. Most people interpreted that law to mean that a vikarma
could not be on the prayer ceremony
platform . However, since Karachapa, like most
Meluhan cities, was built on a platform, a strict interpretation of the law would mean that
Sati should not be anywhere on the entire Dwitiya platform . To keep the yagna legal,
she would either have to move to the other platform of the city or outside the city walls.
Jhooleshwar was momentarily taken aback as Tarak’s objection was accurate in
principle. He tried a rally weakly. ‘Come, come Tarak. You are being too conscientious. I
think that is too strict an interpretation. I think...’
‘No, Shri Jhooleshwarji,’ reverberated a loud voice through the gathering.
Everybody turned to see where the sound came from. Sati, who had come out on her
balcony, continued. ‘Please accept my apologies for interrupting you, Governor,’ said
Sati with a formal namaste. ‘But Tarak’s interpretation of the law is fair. I am terribly
sorry to have disturbed the yagna. My entourage and I shall leave the city immediately.
We will return by the beginning of the third prahar, by which time the ceremony should
be over.’
Shiva clenched his fist. He frantically wanted to wring Tarak’s neck but he controlled
himself with superhuman effort. Within minutes Sati was out of the guest-house, along
with Krittika and five personal bodyguards.
Shiva turned to look at Nandi and
Veerbhadra, both of whom rose to join Sati. They understood that Shiva wanted them to
ensure that she was safe outside the city.
‘It is disgusting that you did not realise this yourself,’ Tarak said scornfully to Sati. What
kind of a princess are you? Don’t you respect the law?’
Sati looked at Tarak. Her face calm. She refused to be drawn into a debate and waited
patiently for her guards to prepare the horses.
‘I don’t understand what a vikarma woman is doing travelling with the convoy of the
Neelkanth. She is polluting the entire journey,’ raged Tarak.
‘Enough!’ intervened Shiva. ‘Princess Sati is leaving with dignity. Stop your diatribe right
now.’
‘I will not!’ screeched Tarak. What kind of a leader are you? You are challenging Lord
Ram’s laws.’

 ‘Tarak!’ yelled Jhooleshwar. ‘The Lord Neelkanth has the right to challenge the law. If
you value your life, you will not defy his authority’
‘I am a Meluhan,’ shrieked Tarak. ‘It is my right to challenge anyone breaking the law. A
dhobi , a mere washerman , challenged Lord Ram. It was his greatness that he acceded
to the man’s objection and renounced his wife. I would urge the Neelkanth to learn from
Lord Ram’s example and use his brains for making decisions.’
‘ENOUGH TARAK!’ erupted Sati.
The entire congregation was stunned into silence by Tarak’s remark. But not Sati.
Something inside her snapped. She had tolerated too many insults for too long. And she
had endured them with quiet dignity. But this time, this man had insulted Shiva. Her
Shiva, she finally acknowledged to herself.
‘I invoke the right of Agnipariksha’
said Sati, back in control.
The stunned onlookers could not believe their ears. A trial by fire!
This was getting worse and worse. Under Agnipariksha, an unfairly injured soul could
challenge their tormentor to a duel. It was called Agnipariksha as combat would take
place within a ring of fire. There was no escape from the ring. The duellists had to keep
fighting till one person surrendered or died. An Agnipariksha was extremely rare these
days. And for a woman to invoke the right was almost unheard of.
‘There is no reason for this, my lady,’ pleaded Jhooleshwar. Just like his subjects, he
was terrified that Princess Sati might be killed in his city. For the gargantuan Tarak
would certainly slay her. The Emperor’s wrath would be terrible. Turning to Tarak,
Jhooleshwar ordered, ‘You will not accept this challenge.’
‘And be called a coward?’
‘You want to prove your bravery?’ spoke Parvateshwar for the first time. ‘Then fight me.
I will act as Sati’s second for the challenge.’
‘Only I have the right to appoint a second, pitratulya’
said Sati, reverentially referring to
Parvateshwar as being ‘like a father’ . Turning to Tarak, she said, ‘I am appointing no
second. You will fight with me.’
‘You will do no such thing Tarak,’ Brahaspati objected this time.
‘Tarak, the only reason you wouldn’t want to fight is if you are afraid of being killed,’ said
Shiva.
Every person turned towards the Neelkanth, shocked by his words. Turning to Sati,
Shiva continued, ‘Citizens of Karachapa, I have seen the Princess fight. She can defeat
anyone. Even the gods.’
Sati stared at Shiva, shocked.
‘I accept the challenge,’ growled Tarak.
Sati nodded at Tarak, climbed on her white steed and turned to leave. At the edge of the
square, she pulled up her horse and turned to take one more look at Shiva. She smiled
at him, turned and rode away.

 
It was the beginning of the third prahar as Shiva and Brahaspati stole quietly into the
local varjish graha , the exercise
hall , to observe Tarak exercising with two partners.
The day’s yagna had been a disaster. With everyone petrified that the princess would
die the next day, no one was inclined to participate in the ceremony. However, as the
yagna had been called, it had to be conducted or the gods would be offended. The
congregation went through the motions and the yagna was called to a close.
Tarak’s famed fearsome blows on his hapless partners filled Brahaspati’s soul with
dread and he came to an immediate decision. ‘I’ll assassinate
him tonight. She will not
die tomorrow’
Shiva turned in stunned disbelief to the chief scientist. ‘Brahaspati? What are you

 saying?’
‘Sati is too noble to meet a fate such as this. I am willing to sacrifice
reputation for her.’
‘But you are a Brahmin. You are not supposed to kill.’
‘I’ll do it for you,’ whispered Brahaspati, emotions clouding his judgement.
lose her, my friend.’
Shiva came close to Brahaspati and hugged him. ‘Don’t corrupt your soul,
am not worth such a big sacrifice.’
Brahaspati clung to Shiva.
Stepping back, Shiva whispered, ‘In any case, your sacrifice is not required.
as the sun rises in the east, Sati will defeat Tarak tomorrow.’

my life and
You will not
my friend. I
For as sure

 
A few hours into the third prahar, Sati returned to the guest house. She did not go up to
her room, but summoned Nandi and Veerbhadra to the central courtyard, drew her
sword and began her practise with them.
A little later Parvateshwar walked in, looking broken. His expression clearly conveyed
his fear that this might be the last time he would talk to Sati. She stopped practising,
sheathed her sword and folded her hands into a respectful namaste. ‘Pitratulya,’ she
whispered.
Parvateshwar came close to Sati, his face distraught. She could not be sure but it
seemed as though he had been crying. She had never seen even a hint of a tear in his
confident eyes.
‘My child,’ mumbled Parvateshwar.
‘I am doing what I think is right,’ said Sati. ‘I am happy’
Parvateshwar
couldn’t find the strength to say anything. For a brief moment, he
considered assassinating Tarak at night. But that would be illegal.
Just then, Shiva and Brahaspati walked in. Shiva noticed Parvateshwar’s face. This was
the first time he had seen any sign of weakness in the general. While he could
understand Parvateshwar’s predicament, he did not like the effect it was having on Sati.
‘I am sorry I am late,’ said Shiva cheerily.
Everyone turned to look at him.
‘Actually, Brahaspati and I had gone to the Lord Varun temple to pray for Tarak,’ said
Shiva. We prayed that the journey his soul would take to the other world would be
comfortable.’
Sati burst out laughing. So did the rest of the party in the courtyard.
‘Bhadra, you are not the right opponent for the practise,’ said Shiva. ‘You move too fast.
Nandi you duel with the princess. And control your agility.’
Turning to Sati, Shiva continued, ‘I saw Tarak practise. His blows have tremendous
power. But the force of the blows slows him down. Turn his strength into his weakness.
Use your agility against his movements.’
Sati nodded, absorbing every word. She resumed her practise with Nandi. Moving
rapidly compared to Nandi’s slower movements, Sati was able to succeed in a strike
that could be kill.
Suddenly, an idea struck Shiva. Instructing Nandi to stop, he asked Sati, ‘Are you
allowed to choose the combat weapon?’
Yes. It’s my prerogative as I threw the challenge.’
‘Then choose the knife. It will reduce the reach of his strikes while you can move in and
out much quicker.’
‘That’s brilliant!’ concurred Parvateshwar, while Brahaspati nodded.
Sati signalled her agreement immediately. Almost at the same instant, Veerbhadra

 emerged with two knives. Giving one to Nandi, he gave the other to Sati. ‘Practise,
Lady.’

my

 
Sati and Tarak stood at the centre of a circular stadium. This was not the main
Rangbhoomi of Karachapa, which was gargantuan in its proportions. This one had been
constructed next to the main stadium, for music concerts that the Mesopotamian
immigrants in Karachapa loved. The arena was of the exact dimensions required for an
agnipariksha. Not so big that a person could simply steer clear of the other contestant
and not too small so that the combat would end fast. There were stands around the
ground and a capacity crowd of over twenty thousand had come to watch the most
important duel in Karachapa for the last five hundred years.
There was a prayer on every lip. Let Father Manu cause a miracle so that Princess Sati
would win. Or at the very least, Eve. Both Tarak and Sati greeted each other with a
namaste, repeating an ancient pledge to fight with honour. Then, turning to the statue of
Lord Varun at the top of the main stand they bowed, asking for blessings from the God
of the Water and the Seas. Jhooleshwar had vacated his ceremonial seat right below
the statue of Lord Varun for Shiva. The governor sat to Shiva’s left with Ayurvati and
Krittika to his left. Brahaspati and Parvateshwar
sat to Shiva’s right. Nandi and
Veerbhadra were in their now famiEar position, behind Shiva. A bird courier had been
sent to Daksha the previous day, informing him of the duel. However, there wasn’t
enough time to expect a reply.
At long last, Jhooleshwar stood up. He was nervous about the agnipariksha, but
appeared composed. As per custom, he raised a balled fist to his heart and boomed:
‘Satya! Dharma! Maan!’ An invocation to Truth. Duty. Honour .
The rest of the stadium rang in agreement. ‘Satya! Dharma! Maan!’
Tarak and Sati echoed. ‘Satya! Dharma! Maan!’
Jhooleshwar nodded to the stadium keeper who lit the ceremonial oil lamp with the holy
fire. The lamp spilled its fire on to the oil channel; the periphery of the central ground
was aflame. The ring for the pariksha had been set.
Jhooleshwar turned to Shiva. ‘My Lord, your instructions to start the duel.’
Shiva looked at Sati with a confident smile. Then turning to the stadium, he declared
loudly, ‘In the purifying fire of Lord Agni, truth will always triumph!’
Tarak and Sati immediately drew their knives. Tarak held his knife in front of him, like
most traditional fighters. He had chosen a strategy that played to his strengths. Keeping
his knife in front of him allowed him to strike the moment Sati came close. He did not stir
too much, allowing Sati to make her moves in front of him.
Sati, breaking all known rules of combat, held her knife behind her. She shifted the knife
continuously from one hand to the other, while keeping a safe distance from her
opponent. The aim was to confuse Tarak about the direction of her attack. Tarak on the
other hand was watching Sati’s movements like a hawk. He saw her right arm flex. The
knife was now in her right hand.
Suddenly Sati leapt to the left. Tarak remained stationary. He knew that with her right
hand holding the knife, the leftward movement was a feint. She would have to move to
the right to bring her knife into play. Sure enough, Sati quickly moved to the right and
brought in her arm up in a stabbing motion. Tarak was prepared. Shifting his knife
quickly to his left arm, he slashed viciously, cutting Sati across her torso. It wasn’t a
deep cut, but it appeared to hurt. A collective gasp went out from the audience.
Sati retreated and rallied. She moved the knife to her back again, transferring it from
one hand to the other. Tarak kept a close eye on her arms. The knife was in her left
hand. He expected her to move to the right, which she did. He remained immobile,

 waiting for her to swerve suddenly to her left. She did, swinging her left arm as she
moved. Tarak acted before her arm could even come close enough to do any damage.
He swung ferociously with his right arm and cut her deep in the left shoulder. Sati
retreated rapidly as the congregation moaned in horror. Some shut their eyes. They
could not bear to look anymore. Most were praying fervently. If it had to be done, let it
be done swiftly and not in a slow painful manner.
‘What is she doing?’ whispered a panic-stricken Brahaspati to Shiva. ‘Why is she
charging in so recklessly?’
Shiva turned to look at Brahaspati, also noticing Parvateshwar’s
face. Parvateshwar
had a surprised, yet admiring grin on his face. Unlike Brahaspati, he knew what was
going on. Turning back to look at the duel, Shiva whispered, ‘She’s laying a trap.’
At the centre, Sati was still transferring the knife between her hands behind her back.
She feigned a move from her right to the left, but this time did not transfer the knife. She
flexed her left arm, keeping the right arm holding the knife loose and relaxed.
Tarak was watching Sati closely, confident that he was going to slowly bleed her to
death. He believed the knife was in her left hand. He waited for her to move right, then
left, which she did in a swift veer. Expecting her left arm to come in, he sliced with his
right hand. Sati neatly pirouetted back. Before a surprised Tarak could react, Sati had
leapt to her right and brought her right hand in brutally onto Tarak’s chest. The knife
pierced Tarak’s lung. The shock of the blow immobilised Tarak. Blood spurted from his
mouth. He dropped his knife and staggered back. Sati ruthlessly maintained the
pressure and dug the knife in deeper, right up to the hilt.
Tarak stumbled back and collapsed to the ground, motionless. The entire stadium was
stunned. Sati’s face had the expression of the mother goddess in fury. Eighty-five years
of repressed anger had surfaced in that instant. She pulled the knife out, slowly twisting
it to inflict maximum damage. Blood spewed out from Tarak’s mouth at an alarming rate.
She raised the knife with both her hands. All she had to do was bring it down on his
heart and Tarak would meet his maker. Then suddenly, her expression became calm
again. It was almost as if someone had sucked out all the negative energy inside her.
She turned around. Shiva, the destroyer of evil, sat on his throne, staring at her with a
slight smile.
Then she looked at Tarak, and whispered. ‘I forgive you.’
The stadium erupted in joy. Even if Lord Varun had himself scripted the fight, it wouldn’t
have been as perfect. It had everything that the Suryavanshis held dear. Defiant when
under pressure, yet magnanimous in victory.
Sati raised her knife and shouted, ‘Jai Shri Ram!’
The entire stadium repeated, ‘Jai Shri Ram!’
Sati turned towards Shiva and roared once again, ‘Jai Shri Ram!’
‘Jai...,’ Shiva’s words were clogged by the knot in his throat.
The Lord won’t mind this time if I don’t complete the cry.
Shiva glanced away from Sati, lest he show his tears to the woman he loved. Regaining
control of himself, he looked back at her with a radiant smile. Sati continued to stare at
Shiva. Emotions that had been dormant in her for too long rippled through her being as
she saw Shiva’s admiration. When she couldn’t bear it any longer, she shut her eyes.

  
CHAPTER 16
The Sun & Earth
 
There was an impromptu celebration that night in Karachapa. Their princess was safe.
The insufferable Tarak had been defeated. Many people in Karachapa believed that
even his own mother must have loathed the surly preacher. He had few supporters in
the liberal city. But there were rules for duels. Hence the moment Sati had forgiven
Tarak, paramedics had rushed in to take him to the hospital. Surgeons had laboured for
six hours to save his life. To much dismay for the town folk, they had succeeded.
‘Have you heard about the poem of the sun and the earth?’ Sati asked Shiva.
They were standing on the balcony of the governor’s palace while a boisterous party
raged inside.
‘No,’ said Shiva with a seductive grin, corning a little closer to her. ‘But I’d love to hear it’
‘Apparently the earth sometimes thinks of the possibility of coming closer to the sun,’
said Sati. ‘But she can’t do that. She is so base and his brilliance so searing, that she
will cause destruction if she draws him closer.’
What now?
‘I disagree,’ said Shiva. ‘I think the sun burns only as long as the earth is close to him. If
the earth wasn’t there, there would be no reason for the sun to exist.’
‘The sun doesn’t exist just for the earth. It exists for every single planet in the solar
system.’
‘Isn’t it really the sun’s choice for whom he chooses to exist?’
‘No,’ said Sati, looking at Shiva, melancholic. ‘The moment he became the sun, his
calling became higher. He does not exist for himself. He exists for the greater good of
everyone. His luminosity is the lifeblood of the solar system. And if the earth has any
sense of responsibility, she will not do anything to destroy this balance.’
‘So what should the sun do?’ asked Shiva, his hurt and anger showing on his face. ‘Just
waste his entire life burning away? Looking at the earth from a distance?’
‘The earth isn’t going away anywhere. The sun and the earth can still share a warm
friendship. But anything more is against the laws. It is against the interests of others.’
Shiva turned away from Sati in anger. He looked north to seek solace from his holy
lake. Feeling nothing, he looked up at the skies, towards the gods he did not believe in.
Dammit!
He banged the balcony railing with his powerful fist, dislodging some bricks and stormed
off.

 
Outside the city walls, in a forested area, a few soldiers lay in wait. At a slight distance,
two hooded figures were seated on large rocks. The captain of the platoon of soldiers
stood rigid in attention next to the duo. He could not believe that he was standing next
to the Queen herself. The privilege overwhelmed him.
One of the hooded figures raised his hand to motion for the captain to step closer. On
the hooded figure’s wrist was a leather bracelet with the serpent Aum. ‘Vishwadyumna,
are you sure this is where we are supposed to meet him? He is late by nearly an hour.’
‘Yes, my Lord,’ replied Vishwadyumna nervously. ‘This is exactly where he had said he
would come.’

 The other hooded figure turned and spoke in a commanding voice - a feminine one. A
voice used to being obeyed without question. ‘That man makes the Queen of the Nagas
wait!’ Turning to the other hooded figure, she continued, ‘I trust you have worked this
out in detail. I hope I haven’t entered this vile territory in vain.’
The other hooded figure moved his fleshy hands in a motion asking the Queen for
patience. ‘Have faith, your Highness. This man is our key to giving the Suryavanshis a
blow that they will never recover from.’
‘Apparently, there was an Agnipariksha fight between the princess and a man in the city
yesterday,’ said Vishwadyumna suddenly, trying to impress the Queen with his sharp
ear for local knowledge. ‘I do not have the exact details. I just hope that our man was
not involved in it.’
The Queen turned swiftly to the other hooded figure. Then back to Vishwadyumna.
‘Please wait with the other soldiers.’
Vishwadyumna sensed he had said something he shouldn’t have and quickly retreated
before his Lord’s stern gaze could reprimand him. This is why he had been told in
training school that a good soldier never speaks unless spoken to.
‘She ’s here?’ asked the Queen with barely suppressed anger.
The other hooded figure nodded.
‘I thought I’d told you to forget about this,’ said the Queen sternly. There is nothing to be
gained by this quest. Do you realise that your stupid attack on Mount Mandar may have
let them suspect that we have a mole in their midst?’
The male figure looked up in apology.
‘Did you come here for her?’
‘No, your Highness,’ said the hooded figure with a deeply respectful tone. This was the
place where he asked us to meet him.’
The Queen reached her hand out and gently patted the man’s shoulder. ‘Stay focussed,
my child,’ said the Queen softly. ‘If we pull this off, it will be our biggest victory ever. Like
you just said, we will strike a blow that they will find very difficult to recover from.’
The man nodded.
‘And yet,’ continued the Queen, pulling her hand back into the shelter of her black
robes, ‘your preoccupation with her, makes you take uncharacteristic decisions. Do you
know he has sent a clear message that she cannot be touched? Otherwise, the deal is
off.’
The hooded figure stared at the Queen in surprise. ‘How did you...’
‘I am the Queen of the Nagas, my child,’ she interrupted. ‘I have more than one piece
on the chessboard.’
The hooded figure continued to look at the Queen, ashamed about his poor call at
Mount Mandar. The Queen’s next words added to his shame. ‘You are making
surprising mistakes, my child. You have the potential to be the greatest Naga ever.
Don’t waste it.’
‘Yes, your Highness.’
The Queen appeared to relax.
‘I think when we are alone now,’ said the Queen, ‘maybe you can refer to me as Mausi .
After all I am your mother ’s sister ’
‘Of course, you are,’ said the hooded figure as a smile reached his eyes. ‘Whatever you
say, mausi.’

 
It had been two weeks since the Agnipariksha. Sati had recovered sufficiently for the
convoy to continue its journey to its next destination. Shiva, Parvateshwar
and
Brahaspati sat together in Shiva’s chambers at the guest-house.

 ‘It’s agreed then,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘I will make the arrangements for us to commence
our journey a week from today. By that time, Sati should have recovered completely’
‘Yes, I think that is a suitable plan,’ agreed Shiva.
‘Parvateshwar, I will not be coming along any further,’ said Brahaspati.
‘Why?’ asked Parvateshwar.
‘Well, the new chemicals I had ordered have come. I was considering going back with
the consignment to Mount Mandar so that the experiments can begin as soon as
possible. If we can get this right, the consumption of water for making the Somras will
reduce drastically.’
Shiva smiled sadly. ‘I am going to miss you my friend.’
‘And I you,’ said Brahaspati. ‘But I am not leaving the country. When you finish your
tour, come to Mount Mandar. I’ll show you around the sylvan forests near our facility’
‘Yes,’ said Shiva with a grin. ‘Perhaps you will reveal some of your scientific skills and
discover a plausible cause for the blue throat!’
Both Shiva and Brahaspati burst out laughing. Parvateshwar, who did not understand
the private joke, looked on politely.
‘Just one point, Brahaspati,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘I will not be able to divert any soldiers
from the royal entourage. I will speak with Governor Jhooleshwar to send some soldiers
along for your return journey.’
‘Thank you, Parvateshwar.
But I am sure I will be fine. Why should a terrorist be
interested in me?’
‘There was another terrorist attack yesterday in a village some fifty kilometres from
Mohan Jo Daro,’ said Parvateshwar.
‘The entire temple was destroyed and all the
Brahmins killed.’
‘Another one,’ said Shiva, angered. ‘That is the third attack this month!’
‘Yes,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘They are getting bolder. And as usual, they escaped before
any back-up could arrive to give them a real fight’
Shiva clenched his fists. He had no idea on how to counter the terror attacks. There was
no way to prepare for them since nobody knew where they would strike next. Was
attacking Swadweep, the Chandravanshi’s
own country, the only way to stop this?
Brahaspati kept quiet, sensing Shiva’s inner turmoil. He knew there were no easy
answers.
Looking at Shiva, Parvateshwar
continued, ‘I will also get my people to make
preparations for our journey. I’ll meet you in the evening for dinner. I think Sati can
finally join us. I will send instructions for Nandi and Veerbhadra to join us. I know you
like their company.’
Shiva looked starled at Parvateshwar’s
uncharacteristic
thoughtfulness. ‘Thank you
Parvateshwar. This is very kind of you. But I believe Krittika, Nandi and Veerbhadra are
going to a flute recital tonight. That crazy Veerbhadra has even bought some jewels so
that he won’t look like a country bumpkin next to Nandi!’
Parvateshwar smiled politely.
‘But it will be a pleasure to dine with you,’ said Shiva.
‘Thank you,’ said Parvateshwar as he got up. After a few steps, he stopped and turned
around. Overcoming his hesitation, he mumbled. ‘Shiva!’
‘Yes?’ Shiva got up.
‘I don’t think I ever told you this,’ said Parvateshwar, uncomfortable. ‘But I would like to
thank you for helping Sati in her agnipariksha. It was your clear thinking which led to
victory’
‘No, no,’ said Shiva. ‘It was her brilliance.’
‘Of course it was,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘But you gave her the confidence and the strategy
to show her brilliance. If there is any person in the world that I look at with a feeling
beyond a sense of duty, it is Sati. I thank you for helping her.’

 ‘You are welcome,’ smiled Shiva, with sense not to embarrass Parvateshwar further by
lengthening this conversation.
Parvateshwar smiled and folded his hands into a namaste. While he had still not fallen
prey to the country-wide ‘Neelkanth fever’, he was beginning to respect Shiva. Earning
Parvateshwar’s esteem was a long journey that Shiva had only just begun. The General
turned around and walked out of the room.
‘He is not a bad sort,’ said Brahaspati, looking at Parvateshwar’s retreating back. ‘He
may be a little surly. But he is one of the most honest Suryavanshis I have ever met. A
true follower of Lord Ram. I hope you don’t get too upset by the ill-tempered things he
says to you.’
‘I don’t,’ said Shiva. ‘In fact, I think very highly of Parvateshwar. He is one man whose
respect I would certainly like to earn.’
Brahaspati smiled seeing yet another instance of Shiva’s large heart. He leaned closer
and said, ‘You are a good man.’
Shiva smiled back.
‘I had not answered you the last time you had asked me, Shiva,’ continued Brahaspati.
‘Honestly, I have never believed in the legend of the Neelkanth. I still don’t.’
Shiva’s smile became a little broader.
‘But I believe in you. If there is one person capable of sucking the negative energy out
of this land, I think it will be you. And I will do all I can to help you. In whatever way I
can.’
‘You are the brother I never had Brahaspati. Just your presence is all the help I need.’
Saying so Shiva embraced his friend. Brahaspati hugged Shiva back warmly, feeling a
sense of renewed energy course through him. He swore once again that he would
never back off from his mission. No matter what. It wasn’t just for Meluha. It was also for
Shiva. His friend.

 
It was over three weeks after Sati’s agnipariksha
that the convoy set off from
Karachapa. The usual seven carriages travelled in a row. This time not five, but six
carriages were dummies. Shiva sat with Sati in the third and they had been joined by
Parvateshwar and Ayurvati as well. It was the first time that Parvateshwar was travelling
in the same carriage as Shiva. Krittika had begged off the carriage and volunteered to
ride, claiming that she was missing the scenic beauty of the countryside. Veerbhadra
was more than pleased to ride along with her in Nandi’s platoon.
They had journeyed just a few days away from Karachapa when the convoy was
brought to a halt by a large caravan travelling hurriedly in the opposite direction.
Parvateshwar
stepped out of the carriage to inquire. Brigadier Vraka came up to
Parvateshwar and executed a military salute.
‘What is the matter?’
‘My Lord, they are refugees from the village of Koonj,’ said Vraka. ‘They are escaping a
terrorist attack.’
‘Escap ing !’ asked a surprised Parvateshwar. ‘You mean the attack is still on?’
‘I think so, my Lord,’ said Vraka, his face filled with rage.
‘Goddamit!’ swore Parvateshwar. Neither Meluha nor he had ever got an opportunity
like this. To be present at the right time and right place with a thousand five hundred
soldiers while a terrorist attack was in progress. And yet, Parvateshwar’s hands were
tied. He was not allowed to take on any mission except to protect the Neelkanth and the
Princess.
‘What nonsense?’
he thought to himself. ‘My orders forbid me from following my
Kshatriya dharma!’

 ‘What’s the matter, Parvateshwar?’
Parvateshwar turned to find Shiva right behind him. Sati and Ayurvati were getting out
of the carriage as well. Before Parvateshwar could answer, a horrible noise tore through
the quiet forest road. It was a sound Shiva had come to recognise. It declared the evil
intentions of the conch-shell bearer, loud and clear. It announced that an attack had
begun. A Naga attack had begun!

  
CHAPTER 17
The Battle of Koonj
 
‘Where are they?’ asked Parvateshwar.
‘They are in my village, my Lord,’ said the scared village headman. ‘It’s a short distance
from here. Some five hundred Chandravanshi soldiers, led by five Nagas. They gave us
thirty minutes to leave. But the Brahmins at the temple were detained.’
Parvateshwar clenched his fists to regain his control despite his fury.
‘Our Panditji is a good man, my Lord,’ said the village headman. Tears spilled out of his
eyes. Vraka put a comforting hand on the headman’s shoulder. But the gesture only
made the headman more miserable. Not knowing the fate of the village priest added to
his guilt.
‘We wanted to stay and fight alongside our Pandit and the other Brahmins,’ sobbed the
headman. ‘They are men of god. They don’t even know how to raise a weapon. How
can they fight against this horde?’
Vraka let go off the headman as anger got the better of him.
‘But Panditji ordered us to leave. He told us to flee with our women and children. He
said he would face whatever Lord Brahma has written in his fate. But if anyone can be
saved, they should be.’
Parvateshwar’s nails dug into his skin. He was livid at the cowardly Chandravanshis for
yet again attacking defenceless Brahmins and not Kshatriyas who could retaliate. He
was incensed at his fate for having put him in a position where he could not take action.
A part of him wanted to ignore his orders. But he was bound not to break the law.
‘THIS NONSENSE HAS TO STOP!’
Parvateshwar looked up to see which voice had echoed his thoughts. The expression
on Shiva’s face almost threw him back for a moment. The intense fury visible in the
Neelkanth would have brought even a Deva to a standstill.
‘We are good people,’ raged Shiva. ‘We are not scared chicken who should turn and
flee! Those terrorists should be on the run. They should be the ones feeling the wrath of
the Suryavanshis!’
A villager standing behind the headman said, ‘But they are terrorists! We cannot defeat
them. The Panditji knew that. That is why he ordered us to run.’
‘But we have a thousand five hundred soldiers,’ said Shiva, irritated at the display of
such cowardice. ‘And another five hundred of you. We outnumber them four to one. We
can crush them. Teach them a lesson they will remember.’
The headman argued. ‘But they have Nagas! They are supernatural, blood-thirsty
killers! What chance do we have against such evil?’
Shiva had the presence of mind to realise that superstition can only be countered by
another stronger belief. He climbed the carriage pedestal to stand tall. The villagers
stared at him. He ripped off his cravat and threw it away. He didn’t need it anymore.
‘I am the Neelkanth!’
All the soldiers looked up at the destroyer of evil mesmerised. They were overjoyed to
see him truly accept his destiny. The villagers who did not know of the Neelkanth’s
arrival were stunned at seeing the legend come alive right before their eyes.
‘I am going to fight these terrorists,’ roared Shiva. ‘I am going to show them that we are
not scared anymore. I am going to make them feel the pain we feel. I am going to let
them know that Meluha is not going to roll over and let them do what they want.’

 Pure energy coursed through the huddled mass that stood in front of Shiva,
straightening their spines and inspiring their souls.
‘Who’s coming with me?’
‘I am,’ bellowed Parvateshwar, feeling the suffocating restraints imposed on him fall
away by Shiva’s pronouncement.
‘I am,’ echoed Sati, Nandi, Veerbhadra and Vraka.
‘I am,’ echoed every single soul standing there.
Suddenly the scared villagers and soldiers were turned into a righteous army. The
soldiers drew their swords. The villagers grabbed whatever weapons they could from
the travelling armoury.
‘To Koonj,’ yelled Shiva, mounting a horse and galloping ahead.
Parvateshwar and Sati quickly unharnessed the horses from the cart and raced behind
Shiva. The Suryavanshis charged behind them, letting out a cry louder than any Naga
conch shell. As they stormed into Koonj, the horror of what had transpired hit them. The
Chandravanshis had ignored the rest of the village and concentrated on the area that
would distress the Meluhans most - their venerated temple. Decapitated bodies of the
Brahmins lay around the shrine. They had been clumped together and executed. The
temple itself was ruthlessly destroyed and aflame. The sight of the gruesome attack
enraged
the Suryavanshis
even more. They charged like crazed bulls. The
Chandravanshis had no chance. They were completely outnumbered and overwhelmed.
They lost ground quickly. Some of the Chandravanshis were beginning to retreat when
the five Nagas rallied them back. They fought on against the crushing odds, clashing
against the righteous Suryavanshis with unexpected courage.
Parvateshwar fought like a man possessed. Shiva, who had never seen the General
battle, was awed by his skill and valour. Like Shiva, Parvateshwar knew that the key to
victory were the Nagas. As long as they were alive, the Suryavanshis would feel terrified
and the Chandravanshis would draw inspiration from them. He attacked one of them
with frenzied aggression.
The Naga skilfully parried Parvateshwar’s
attack with his shield. Bringing his sword
down, he tried to strike Parvateshwar’s exposed shoulder. What he didn’t know was that
Parvateshwar had deliberately left his flank exposed. Swinging to the side to avoid the
blow, Parvateshwar let his shield clap to his back as he swiftly drew a knife held in a clip
behind. He hurled it at the Naga’s exposed right shoulder. His cry let Parvateshwar
know that the knife had penetrated deep.
The Naga roared in fury. But to Parvateshwar’s
surprised admiration, he swung his
sword arm, with the knife buried in his shoulder, back into the batde. Parvateshwar
brought his shield back up and blocked the slightly weaker strike from the Naga. He
brought his sword up in a stab but the Naga was too quick and deflected it. Swerving
left, Parvateshwar rammed his shield down hard on the knife still buried in the Naga’s
shoulder. The knife chipped through the shoulder bone. The Naga snarled in pain and
stumbled. That was the opening that Parvateshwar needed. Bringing his sword up in a
brutal upward stab, he pushed it ruthlessly through the Naga’s heart. The Naga froze as
Parvateshwar’s
sword ripped the life out of him. Parvateshwar pushed his sword in
deeper, completing the kill. The Naga fell back motionless.
Parvateshwar was not above the Meluhan fascination with a Naga face. He kneeled to
tear the Naga’s mask off to reveal a horrifying countenance. The Naga’s nose was pure
bone and had grown to almost form a bird-like beak. His ears were ridiculously large
while his mouth was grotesquely constricted. He looked like a vulture in human form.
Parvateshwar quickly whispered what every Suryavanshi said when he brought down a
worthy opponent, ‘Have a safe journey to the other side, brave warrior.’
One down four to go, thought Parvateshwar rising. Correction, two down, three to go.
He saw Shiva bring down a gigantic Naga in the distance. Both Shiva and Parvateshwar

 saw each other and nodded. Shiva pointed towards Parvateshwar’s back. Parvateshwar
turned to see a ferocious Naga fighting five Suryavanshis singlehandedly. He turned
back to look at Shiva and nodded. Shiva turned to charge at another Naga as
Parvateshwar turned to the one marked for him.
Shiva dashed through the pitched battle scene towards the Naga who had just killed a
Suryavanshi soldier. He leapt high as he ran in close, with his shield in front to prevent
the standard swinging strike from the Naga. The Naga had brought his own shield up to
prevent what he expected from Shiva — the orthodox up to down swinging strike from a
good height. Shiva, however, surprised the Naga by thrusting in his sword sideward,
neatly circumventing the Naga’s shield and gashing his arm. The Naga bellowed in pain
and fell back. He straightened and held his shield high again, realising that Shiva was
going to be a much more formidably enemy than the previous Suryavanshi.
As Shiva grimly fought the fearless Naga, he did not notice another one at a distance.
This Naga could see that their assault was being progressively pushed back. It was a
matter of time before the Nagas and the Chandravanshis would have to retreat. This
Naga would have to face the ignominy of having led the first failed attack. And he could
see that it was Shiva who had led the counter-offensive. That man had to be destroyed
for the future of the mission. The Naga drew his bow forward.
Shiva meanwhile, unaware of the danger, had wedged his sword a little into the Naga’s
stomach. The Naga grimly fought on, stepping back slowly while ramming Shiva with his
shield. He tried in vain to swing his sword down to slice Shiva, who kept his own shield
at the ready. He kept fending the Naga’s blows while pressing ahead, pushing the
sword in deeper and deeper. It was a few more seconds before the Naga’s soul gave
up. It slipped away as his body bled to death and collapsed. Shiva looked down at the
fallen Naga in awe.
These people maybe evil, but they are fearless soldiers.
Shiva looked to the left to find that Parvateshwar too had killed the Naga he had
engaged. He continued to turn slowly, trying to find the last Naga. Then he heard a loud
shout from the person he had come to love beyond reason.
‘S-H-I-V-A.’
Shiva turned to his right to find Sati racing towards him. He looked behind her to see if
anyone was chasing her. There was nobody. He frowned. Before he could react, Sati
leapt forward. A jump timed to perfection.
The Naga at the distance had released the agnibaan
or the fire arrow , one of the
legendary poisoned arrows of their people. The venom on its tip burned its victim’s body
from the inside, causing a slow, painful death that would scar the soul for many births.
The arrow had been set straight at Shiva’s neck. It sped unerringly on its deadly
mission. However, the Naga had not calculated the possibility of someone obstructing
its path.
Sati twisted her body in mid-air as she leapt in front of Shiva. The arrow slammed into
her chest with brutal force, propelling her airborne body backward. She fell to Shiva’s
left, limp and motionless. A stunned Shiva stared at Sati’s prone body, his heart
shattering.
The destroyer of evil roared in fury. He charged at the Naga like a wild elephant on the
brink of insanity, his sword raised. The Naga was momentarily staggered by the
fearsome sight of the charging Neelkanth. But to his credit, he rallied. He swiftly drew
another arrow from his quiver, loaded it and let it fly. Shiva swung his sword to deflect
the arrow, barely missing a step or decreasing his manic speed. The increasingly panic
struck Naga loaded another arrow and shot again. Shiva swung his sword once more,
deflecting the arrow easily, picking up more speed. The Naga reached back to draw
another arrow. But it was too late. With a fierce yell, Shiva leapt high as he neared the
Naga. He swung his sword viciously, decapitating the Naga with one swing of his sword.

 The Naga’s lifeless body fell in a heap as his severed head flew with the mighty blow,
while his still pumping heart spewed blood through the gaping neck.
The Neelkanth’s vengeance
was not quenched. Screaming, Shiva bent and kept
hacking at the Naga’s inert body, ruthlessly slashing it to bits. No assertion of reason,
no articulation of sanity could have penetrated Shiva’s enraged mind. Except for a soft,
muffled, injured voice that was barely audible in the din of battle, except to him.
‘Shiva...’
He turned back to look at Sati lying in the distance, her head raised slightly.
‘Sati!’
He sped towards her, bellowing, ‘Parvateshwar! Get Ayurvati! Sati has fallen!’
Ayurvati had already seen Sati’s injured body. The Chandravanshis were retreating in
haste. Ayurvati ran towards Sati, as did Parvateshwar on hearing Shiva’s call. Shiva
reached her first. She was motionless, but alive. She was breathing heavily as the arrow
had pierced her left lung, flooding her innards with her blood. She couldn’t speak as the
force of the blow had made the blood gush from her mouth. But she continued to stare
at Shiva. Her face had a strange smile, almost serene. She kept opening her mouth as
if trying to say something. Shiva desperately wanted to hold her, but he kept his hands
locked together as he tried frantically to control his tears.
‘O Lord Brahma!’ cried Ayurvati as she reached Sati and recognised the arrow.
‘Mastrak! Dhruvini! Get a stretcher. Now!’
Parvateshwar, Ayurvati, Mastrak and Dhruvini carried Sati to one of the village houses
with Shiva following closely Ayurvati’s other assistants had already begun cleaning the
hut and setting the instruments for the surgery.
‘Wait outside, my Lord,’ said Ayurvati to Shiva, raising her hand.
Shiva wanted to follow Ayurvati into the hut, but Parvateshwar
held him back by
touching his shoulder. ‘Ayurvati is one of the best doctors in the world, Shiva. Let her do
her job.’
Shiva turned to look at Parvateshwar, who was doing an admirable job of controlling his
emotions. But it took one look in his eyes for Shiva to know that Parvateshwar was as
afraid for Sati as he was. Probably more than he had been before Sati’s agnipariksha.
Suddenly a thought hit Shiva. He turned and hurried to the closest Naga body. Bending
quickly, he checked the right wrist. Finding nothing there, he turned and rushed to the
other Naga dead body.
Meanwhile, Parvateshwar had rallied his disturbed mind enough to realise the important
tasks that needed to be done. He called Vraka and ordered, ‘Place guards over the
prisoners of war. Get doctors to attend to all the injured, including the Chandravanshis.’
‘The injured Chandravanshis
have already taken their poison, my Lord,’ said Vraka.
‘You know they will never want to be caught alive.’
Parvateshwar
looked at Vraka with a withering look, clearly saying that he wasn’t
interested in the details and Vraka should get to the task at hand.
‘Yes, my Lord,’ said Vraka, acknowledging Parvateshwar’s silent order.
‘Arrange
a perimeter
for any counter-attack,’
continued
Parvateshwar,
his
consciousness already drawn back to Sati’s condition in the house behind him. ‘And...’
Vraka looked up at Parvateshwar, surprised by his Lord’s hesitation. He had never seen
his Lord hesitate before. But Vraka had the good sense to not say anything. He waited
for his Lord to complete his statement.
‘And...’ continued Parvateshwar. ‘There should be some courier-pigeons still alive in the
temple. Send a red coloured letter to Devagiri. To the Emperor. Tell him Princess Sati is
seriously injured.’
Vraka looked up in disbelief. He had no news about Sati. But wisely, he did not say
anything.
‘Tell the Emperor,’ continued Parvateshwar, ‘that she has been shot by an agnibaan.’

 ‘O Lord Indra!’ blurted Vraka unable to control his shocked dismay.
‘Do it now, Brigadier!’ snarled Parvateshwar.
‘Yes, my Lord,’ said Vraka with a weak salute.
Shiva meanwhile had already checked the wrists of four of the Nagas. None of them
wore the leather bracelet with the serpent aum that Shiva had come to recognise. He
reached the last one. The one who had shot Sati. The wretched one who Shiva had
hacked. Shiva kicked the Naga’s torso with intense hatred before trying to find his right
arm. It took him some time to find the severed limb. Locating it, he raised the remnants
of the robe to check the wrist. There was no leather bracelet. It wasn’t him.
Shiva came back to the hut to find Parvateshwar seated on a stool outside. Krittika was
standing beside the hut entrance, sobbing uncontrollably. Veerbhadra was holding her
gently comforting her. A distraught Nandi stood at Veerbhadra’s side, his face stunned
into a blank expression. Parvateshwar looked up at Shiva and pointed to the empty
stool next to him with a weak smile. He was making brave attempts to appear under
control. Shiva sat down slowly and looked into the distance, waiting for Ayurvati to come
out.

 
‘We have removed the arrow, my Lord,’ said Ayurvati.
Shiva and Parvateshwar were standing in the hut, looking at an unconscious Sati.
Nobody else was allowed in. Ayurvati had clearly said that Sati did not need the risk of
increased infection. And nobody dared argue with the formidable Ayurvati on medical
matters. Mastrak and Dhruvini had already fanned out to support the other medical
officers treating the injured Suryavanshi soldiers.
Shiva turned to the right of the bed to see the bloodied tong that had been used to
stretch Sati’s innards to pull the arrow out. That tong would never be used again. It had
been infected with the agnibaan poison. No amount of heat or chemicals would make
the instrument sterile and safe again. Next to the tong lay the offending arrow, wrapped
in neem leaves, where it would stay for one full day, before being buried deep in a dry
grave to ensure it would not cause any more harm.
Shiva looked at Ayurvati, his eyes moist, unable to find the strength to ask the question
that raged in his heart.
‘I will not lie to you, my Lord,’ said Ayurvati, in the detached manner that doctors will
themselves into, to find the strength in traumatic circumstances. ‘It doesn’t look good.
Nobody in history has survived an agnibaan which has penetrated one of the vital
organs. The poison will start causing an intense fever in some time, which will result in
the failing of one organ after another.’
Shiva looked down at Sati and then up pleadingly. Ayurvati fought hard to rein in her
tears and keep her composure. She couldn’t afford to lose control. She had many lives
to save in the next few hours.
‘I am sorry, my Lord,’ said Ayurvati. ‘But there really is no cure. We can only give some
medicines to make her end easier.’
Shiva glared angrily at Ayurvati. ‘We are not giving up! Is that clear?’
Ayurvati looked at the ground, unable to meet Shiva’s eye.
‘If the fever is kept under control, then her organs will not be damaged, right?’ asked
Shiva, as a glimmer of hope entered his being.
Ayurvati looked up and said, ‘Yes, my Lord. But that is not a final solution. The fever
caused by an agnibaan can only be delayed, not broken. If we try and control the fever,
it will come back even stronger once the medicines are stopped.’
‘Then we will control the fever forever!’ cried Shiva. ‘I will sit by her side all my life if
needed. The fever will not rise.’

 Ayurvati was about to say something to Shiva, but thought better of it and kept silent.
She would come back to Shiva in a few hours. She knew that Sati could not be saved. It
was impossible. Precious time was being wasted in this futile discussion. Time that
could be used to save other lives.
‘Alright, my Lord,’ said Ayurvati, quickly administering the medicines to Sati to keep her
fever down. ‘This should keep her fever down for a few hours.’
She looked up at Parvateshwar standing at the back for an instant. Parvateshwar knew
that keeping the fever down would only lengthen Sati’s agony. But he too felt the
glimmer of hope that Shiva felt.
Turning back towards Shiva, Ayurvati said, ‘My Lord, you too are injured. Let me dress
your wounds and I’ll leave.’
‘I am alright,’ said Shiva, not taking his eyes off Sati for an instant.
‘No, you are not, my Lord,’ said Ayurvati firmly. ‘Your wounds are deep. If they catch an
infection, then it could be life threatening.’
Shiva did not answer. He just kept looking at Sati and waved his hand dismissively.
‘Shiva!’ shouted Ayurvati. Shiva looked up at her. ‘You cannot help Sati if you yourself
become unwell!’
The harsh tone had the desired effect. While Shiva did not move from his place, he let
Ayurvati dress his wounds. Ayurvati then quickly tended to Parvateshwar’s wounds and
left the hut.

 
Shiva looked at the prahar lamp in the hut. It had been three hours since Ayurvati had
removed the arrow. Parvateshwar had left the hut to look after the other injured and
make the preparations for setting up camp, since the convoy was going to stay in Koonj
for some time. That was Parvateshwar’s way. If he was confronted with an ugly situation
that he could do nothing about, he did not wallow in his misery. He would drown himself
in his work so that he did not have to think about the crisis.
Shiva was different. Many years back, he had sworn that he would never run from a
difficult situation. Even if there was absolutely nothing he could do. He hadn’t left Sati’s
side for a moment. He sat patiently by her bed, waiting for her to recover. Hoping for her
to recover. Praying for her to recover.
‘Shiva...’ a barely audible whisper broke the silence.
Shiva looked at Sati’s face. Her eyes were slightly open. Her hand had moved
indiscernibly. He pulled his chair closer, careful not to touch her.
‘I’m so sorry,’ cried Shiva. ‘I should never have got us into this fight.’
‘No, no,’ murmured Sati. ‘You did the right thing. Someone had to make our stand. You
have come to Meluha to lead us and to destroy evil. You did your duty.’
Shiva continued to stare at Sati, overcome by grief. Sati widened her eyes a bit, she
was trying to take in as much of Shiva as she could, in what she knew were her last
moments. Death is the ultimate destroyer of a soul’s aspirations. Ironically, it is usually
the approach of this very destruction which gives a soul the courage to challenge every
constraint and express itself. Express even a long-denied dream.
‘It is my time to go, Shiva,’ whispered Sati. ‘But before I go, I want to tell you that the
last few months have been the happiest in my life.’
Shiva continued to look at Sati with moist eyes. His hands developed a life of their own
and moved towards Sati. He checked himself in time.
‘I wish you had come into my life earlier,’ said Sati, letting out a secret that she hadn’t
even acknowledged to herself. ‘My life would have been so different.’
Shiva’s eyes tried frantically to restrain themselves, struggling against the despair that
needed an outlet.

 ‘I wish I had told you earlier,’ murmured Sati. ‘Because the first time that I am telling you
will also probably be the last.’
Shiva looked on at her, his voice choked.
Sati looked deeply into Shiva’s eyes, whispering softly, ‘I love you.’
The dam broke and tears poured down Shiva’s grief-stricken face.
‘You are going to repeat these words for at least another hundred years,’ sobbed Shiva.
‘You are not going anywhere. I will fight the god of death himself, if I have to. You are
not going anywhere.’
Sati smiled sadly and put her hand in Shiva’s. Her hand was burning. The fever had
begun its assault.

  
CHAPTER 18
Sati and the Fire Arrow
 
‘Nothing can be done, my Lord,’ said a visibly uncomfortable Ayurvati.
She and Shiva were standing in a corner of the hut, at what they thought was a safe
distance beyond the range of Sati’s ears. Parvateshwar was standing beside them,
holding his tears back.
‘Come on, Ayurvati,’ urged Shiva. ‘You are the best doctor in the land. All we have to do
is break the fever.’
‘This fever cannot be broken,’ reasoned Ayurvati. ‘There is no cure for the agnibaan
poison. We are only lengthening Sati’s agony by keeping the fever low. The moment the
medicines are stopped, the fever will recur with a vengeance.’
‘Let it go, Shiva,’ mumbled a frail voice from the bed. Everyone turned to stare at Sati.
Her face bore a smile that comes only with the acceptance of the inevitable. ‘I have no
regrets. I have told you what I needed to. I am content. My time has come.’
‘Don’t give up on me, Sati,’ cried Shiva. ‘You are not gone yet. We will find a way. I will
find a way. Just bear with me.’
Sati gave up. She didn’t have the strength. She also knew that Shiva had to find his own
peace with her death. And he wouldn’t find that unless he felt he had tried everything
possible to save her.
‘I can feel my fever rising,’ said Sati. ‘Please give me the medicines.’
Ayurvati glanced at Sati uncomfortably. All her medical training told her that she
shouldn’t do this. She knew that she was just increasing Sati’s suffering by giving her
medicines. Sati stared hard at Ayurvati. She couldn’t give up now. Not when Shiva had
asked her to hang on.
‘Give me the medicines, Ayurvatiji,’ repeated Sati. ‘I know what I am doing.’
Ayurvati gave Sati the medicines. She gazed into Sati’s eyes, expecting to find some
traces of fear or anguish. There were none. Ayurvati smiled gently and walked back to
Shiva and Parvateshwar.
‘I know!’ exclaimed Shiva. ‘Why don’t we give her the Somras?’
‘What effect will that have, my Lord?’ asked a surprised Ayurvati. ‘The Somras only
works on the oxidants and increases a person’s lifespan. It doesn’t work on injuries.’
‘Look Ayurvati, I don’t think anyone truly understands everything about the Somras. I
know you know that. What you don’t know is that the Somras repaired a frostbitten toe
that I had lived with all my life. It also repaired my dislocated shoulder.’
‘What!’ said a visibly surprised Parvateshwar. ‘That’s impossible. The Somras does not
cure physical disabilities.’
‘It did in my case.’
‘But that could also be because you are special, my Lord,’ said Ayurvati. ‘You are the
Neelkanth.’
‘I didn’t drop from the sky, Ayurvati. My body is as human as Sati’s. As human as yours.
Let’s just try it!’
Parvateshwar did not need any more convincing. He dashed out to find Vraka sitting on
a stool. Vraka immediately rose and saluted his commander.
‘Vraka,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘The temple could still have some Somras powder. It was
the main production centre of the area. I want that powder. Now’
‘You will have it in ten minutes, my Lord,’ boomed Vraka as he rushed off with his

 guards.

 
‘There is nothing else to do but wait,’ said Ayurvati as Sati fell asleep. The Somras had
been administered — a stronger dose than usual. ‘Parvateshwar, you are tired. You
need to recover from your wounds. Please go and sleep.’
‘I don’t need sleep,’ said Parvateshwar stubbornly. ‘I am staying on guard with my
soldiers at the perimeter. You can’t trust those Chandravanshis.
They may launch a
counterattack at night.’
A frustrated Ayurvati glared at Parvateshwar, her belief reinforced that the machismo of
the Kshatriyas made them impossible patients.
‘Are you going to bed, my Lord?’ asked Ayurvati, turning towards Shiva, hoping that at
least he would listen. ‘There is nothing you can do now. We just have to wait. And you
need the rest.’
Shiva just shook his head. Wild horses could not drag him away from Sati.
‘We could arrange a bed in this hut,’ continued Ayurvati. ‘You could sleep here if you
wish so that you can keep an eye on Sati.’
‘Thank you, but I am not going to sleep,’ said Shiva, briefly looking at Ayurvati before
turning towards Sati. ‘I am staying here. You go to sleep. I will call you if there is any
change.’
Ayurvati glared at Shiva and then whispered, ‘As you wish, my Lord.’
A tired Ayurvati walked towards her own hut. She needed to get some rest since the
next day would be busy. She would have to check the wounds of all the injured to
ensure that recovery was proceeding properly. The first twenty-four hours were crucial.
Her medical corps had been broken into groups to keep a staggered, all-night vigil for
any emergencies.
‘I will be with the soldiers, Shiva,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘Nandi and Veerbhadra are on
duty outside along with some of my personal guards.’
Shiva knew what Parvateshwar actually wanted to say.
‘I will call you as soon as there is a change, Parvateshwar,’ said Shiva, looking up at the
General.
Parvateshwar smiled weakly and nodded to Shiva. He rushed out before his feelings
could cause him any embarrassment.

 
Parvateshwar sat silently, his soldiers at a respectful distance. They could tell when
their Lord wanted to be left alone. Parvateshwar was lost in thoughts of Sati. Why
should a person like her be put through so much suffering by the Almighty? He
remembered her childhood. The day when he decided that here was a girl he would be
proud to have as his goddaughter.
That fateful day, when for the first and only time, he regretted his vow to not have any
progeny of his own. Which foolish father would not want a child like Sati?
It was a lazy afternoon more than a hundred years ago. Sati had just returned from the
Gurukul at the tender age of sixteen. Full of verve and a passionate belief in Lord Ram’s
teachings. Lord Brahmanayak still reigned over the land of Meluha. His son, Prince
Daksha, was content being a family man, spending his days with his wife and daughter.
He showed absolutely no inclination to master the warrior ways of the Kshatriya. Neither
did he show the slightest ambition to succeed his father.
On that day, Daksha had settled down for a family picnic on the banks of the river

 Saraswati, a short distance from Devagiri. Parvateshwar remembered well his duties as
the bodyguard to Daksha then. He sat near the Prince, close enough to protect him, but
far enough to give some privacy to the prince and his wife. Sati had wandered off into
the forest further in the distance, close to the river so that she was visible.
Suddenly Sati’s cry ripped through the silence. Daksha, Veerini and Parvateshwar
looked up startled. They rushed to the edge of the bank to see Sati at the river bend,
ferociously battling a pack of wild dogs. She was blocking them to protect a severely
injured, fair woman. It could be seen even from the distance that the caste-unmarked
woman was a recent immigrant, who did not know that one never approached the banks
without a sword to protect oneself from wild animals. She must have been attacked by
the pack, which was large enough to bring down even a charging lion.
‘Sati!’ shouted Daksha in alarm.
Drawing his sword, he charged down the river to protect his daughter. Parvateshwar
followed Daksha, his sword drawn for batde. Within moments, they had jumped into the
fray. Parvateshwar charged aggressively into the pack, easily hacking many with quick
strikes. Sati, rejuvenated by the sudden support, fought back the four dogs charging her
all at once. Daksha, despite an obvious lack of martial skills, fought ferociously, with the
passionately protective spirit that comes only with being a parent. But the animals could
sense that Daksha was the weakest amongst their human enemies. Six dogs charged
at him at the same time.
Daksha drove his sword forward in a brutal jab at the dog in front of him. A mistake.
Even though Daksha felled the dog, his sword was stuck in the dead animal. That was
all the opening that the other dogs needed. One charged viciously from the side, seizing
Daksha’s right forearm in its jaws. Daksha roared in pain, but held on to his sword as he
tried to wrestle his arm free. Another dog bit Daksha’s left leg, yanking some of his flesh
out. Seeing his Lord in trouble, Parvateshwar yelled in fury as he swung his sword at
the body of the dog clinging to Daksha’s arm, cleanly cutting the beast in half.
Parvateshwar
pirouetted around in the same smooth motion slashing another dog
charging Daksha from the front. Sati moved in to protect Daksha’s left flank as Daksha
angrily stabbed the dog clinging to his leg. Seeing their numbers rapidly depleting, the
remaining dogs retreated yelping.
‘Daksha!’ sobbed Veerini, as she rushed to hold up her collapsing husband. He was
losing blood at an alarming rate from his numerous wounds, especially the leg. The dog
must have bitten through a major artery. Parvateshwar quickly blew his distress conch
shell. A cry for help reached the scouts at the closest crossing-house.
Soldiers and
paramedics would be with them in a few minutes. Parvateshwar bound his angvastram
tight around Daksha’s thigh to stem the bleeding. Then he quickly helped the injured
foreign woman move closer to the royal party.
‘Father, are you alright?’ whispered Sati as she held her father’s hand.
‘Dammit, Sati!’ shouted Daksha. What do you think you were doing?’
Sati fell silent at the violent response from her doting father.
‘Who asked you to be a hero?’ harangued Daksha, fuming at his daughter. ‘What if
something had happened to you? What would I do? Where would I go? And for whom
were you risking your life? What difference does the life of that woman make?’
Sati continued to look down, distraught at the scolding. She had been expecting praise.
The crossing-house
soldiers and paramedics rushed to the scene. With efficient
movements, they quickly stemmed the flow of Daksha’s blood. Dressing Parvateshwar’s
and Sati’s minor wounds rapidly, they carried Daksha on a stretcher. His wounds
needed attention from the royal physician.
As Sati saw her father being carried away, she stayed rooted, deeply guilty at the harm
her actions had caused. She was only trying to save a woman in distress. Wasn’t it one
of Lord Ram’s primary teachings that it is the duty of the strong to protect the weak?

 She felt a soft touch on her shoulder. She turned to face Captain Parvateshwar, her
father’s severe bodyguard. Strangely though, his face sported a rare smile.
‘I am proud of you, my child,’ whispered Parvateshwar. You are a true follower of Lord
Ram.’
Tears suddenly burst in Sati’s eyes. She looked away quickly. Taking time to control
herself she looked up with a wan smile at the man she would grow to call Pitratulya.
She nodded softly.
Jolted back into the present by a bird call, Parvateshwar scanned the perimeter, his
eyes moist at the ancient memory. He clutched his hands in a prayer and whispered,
‘She’s your true follower, Lord Ram. Fight for her.’

 
Shiva had lost track of time. Obviously, nobody had been assigned to reset the prahar
lamps when so many lives were still in danger. Looking out of the window, he could see
early signs of dawn. Shiva’s wounds burned, crying for relief. But he wasn’t going to
give in. He sat quietly on his chair, next to Sati’s bed, restraining himself from making
any noise that would disturb her. Sati held his hand tightly. Despite the searing heat of
her feverish body, Shiva did not move his hands away. His palms were sweaty due to
the intense heat.
He looked longingly at Sati and softly whispered, ‘Either you stay here or I leave this
world with you. The choice is yours.’
He felt a slight twitch. He looked down to see Sati’s hand move slightly, allowing the
sweat to slide from between their entwined palms. It was almost impossible to say
where the sweat came from.
Is it Sati’s or mine?
Shiva immediately reached out with his other hand towards Sati’s forehead. It was
burning even more strongly. But there were soft beads of perspiration on the temple. A
burst of elation shot through Shiva’s being.

 
‘By the great Lord Brahma,’ whispered Ayurvati in awe. ‘I have never seen anything like
this.’
She was standing besides Sati’s bed. The still sleeping Sati was sweating profusely, her
garments and bed soaked. Parvateshwar stood by her side, his face aglow with hope.
‘The agnibaan fever never breaks,’ continued a stunned Ayurvati. ‘This is a miracle.’
Shiva looked up, his face shimmering with the ecstasy of a soul that had salvaged its
reason for existence. ‘May the Holy Lake bless the Somras.’
Parvateshwar noticed Sati’s hand clutched tightly in Shiva’s but he did not comment.
The bliss of this moment had finally crowded out his instinctive drive to stop something
unacceptable under the laws of the land.
‘My Lord,’ said Ayurvati softly. ‘We must bathe her quickly. The sweat must be removed.
However, considering that her wounds cannot get wet, my nurses will have to rub her
down.’
Shiva looked up at Ayurvati and nodded, not understanding the implication.
‘Umm, my Lord,’ said Ayurvati. ‘That means you will have to leave the room.’
‘Of course,’ said Shiva.
As he got up to leave, Ayurvati said, ‘My Lord, your hands would need to be washed as
well.’
Shiva looked down, noticing Sati’s sweat. He looked up at Ayurvati and nodded, ‘I will

 do so immediately.’

 
‘This is a miracle, Sati. Nobody has ever recovered from an agnibaan!’ said Ayurvati,
beaming ear to ear. ‘I’ll be honest. I had given up hope. It was the Lord’s faith that has
kept you alive.’
Sati was lying on her bed wearing a smile and freshly washed clothes. A new bed had
been brought in with freshly laundered and sterilised linen. All traces of the toxic sweat
triggered by the Somras had been removed.
‘Oh no,’ said a self-conscious Shiva. ‘I did nothing. It was Sati’s fighting spirit that saved
her.’
‘No, Shiva. It was you. Not me,’ said Sati, holding Shiva’s hand without any hint of
tentativeness. ‘You have saved me at so many levels. I don’t know how I can even
begin to repay you.’
‘By never saying again that you have to repay me.’
Sati smiled even more broadly and held Shiva’s hand tighter. Parvateshwar looked on
gloomily at both of them, now unhappy at the open display of their love.
‘All right,’ said Ayurvati, clapping her hands together as if to signal the end of an
episode. ‘Much as I would like to sit here and chitchat with all of you, I have work to do.’
‘What work?’ asked Shiva playfully. ‘You are a brilliant doctor. You have an exceptional
team. I know that every single injured person has been saved. There is nothing more for
you to do.’
‘Oh there is, my Lord,’ said Ayurvati with a smile. ‘I have to put on record how the
Somras can cure an agnibaan wound. I will present this at the medical council as soon
as I return to Devagiri. This is big news. We must research the curative properties of the
Somras. There is a lot of work to do!’
Shiva smiled fondly at Ayurvati.
Sati whispered, ‘Thank you Ayurvatiji. Like thousands of others, I too owe my life to
you.’
‘You owe me nothing, Sati. I only did my duty.’
Ayurvati bowed with a formal namaste and left the room.
‘Well, even I...,’ mumbled Parvateshwar awkwardly, as he walked out.
Parvateshwar was surprised to find Ayurvati waiting for him outside. She was standing
at a safe distance from the guards. Whatever it was that she wanted to talk about, she
did not want the others to hear.
‘What is it, Ayurvati?’ asked Parvateshwar.
‘I know what’s bothering you Parvateshwar,’ said Ayurvati.
‘Then how can you just stand by and watch? I don’t think it is right. I know that this is not
the correct time to say anything. But I will raise the issue when appropriate.’
‘No, you shouldn’t’
‘How can you say that?’ asked a shocked Parvateshwar. ‘You come from a rare family
which did not have even one renegade Brahmin during the rebellion. Lord Ram insisted
that the laws had to be followed strictly. He demonstrated repeatedly that even he
wasn’t above the law. Shiva is a good man. I won’t deny that But he cannot be above
the law. Nobody can be above the law. Otherwise our society will collapse. You above
all should know this.’
‘I know only one thing,’ said Ayurvati, determined. ‘If the Neelkanth feels it is right, then
it is right.’
Parvateshwar looked at Ayurvati as if he didn’t recognise her. This could not be the
woman he knew and admired, the woman who followed the law without exception.
Parvateshwar
had begun to respect Shiva. But the respect had not turned into

 unquestioning faith. He did not believe that Shiva was the one who would complete Lord
Ram’s work. In Parvateshwar’s
eyes, only Lord Ram deserved absolute obedience.
Nobody else.
‘In any case,’ said Ayurvati, ‘I have to leave. I have a theory to think about.’

 
‘Really?’ asked Shiva. You mean it is not necessary in Meluha that the Emperor’s firstborn son succeed him?’
‘Yes,’ replied Sati smiling.
Shiva and Sati had spent many hours over the previous week talking about matters
important and mundane. Sati, while recovering quickly, was still bedridden. The convoy
had set up camp at Koonj till such time as the injured were ready to travel. The journey
to Lothal had been called off. Shiva and Parvateshwar had decided that it was better to
return to Devagiri as soon as the wounded were able to.
Sati shifted slightly to relieve a bit of the soreness in her back. But she did not let go of
Shiva’s hand while doing so. Shiva leaned forward and pushed back a strand of hair
that had slipped onto Sati’s face. She smiled lovingly at him and continued, ‘You see, till
around two hundred and fifty years back, the children of the kings were not his birthchildren but were drawn from the Maika system. So there was no question of knowing
who the first-born was. We could only know his first-adopted.’
‘Fair point.’
‘But in addition, it was not necessary that the first-adopted child would succeed. This
was another one of the laws that Lord Ram instituted for stability and peace. You see, in
the olden days there were many royal families, each with their own small kingdoms.’
‘All right,’ said Shiva, paying as much attention to Sati’s words as to the hypnotising
dimples that formed on her cheeks when she spoke. ‘These kings would probably be at
war all the time, so that one of them could be overlord for however short a period.’
‘Obviously,’ smiled Sati, shaking her head at the foolishness of the kings before Lord
Ram’s time.
‘Well, it is the same everywhere,’ said Shiva, remembering the constant warfare in his
part of the world.
‘Battles for supremacy between the kings led to many unnecessary
and futile wars,
where the only ones who suffered were the common people,’ continued Sati. ‘Lord Ram
felt it was ridiculous for the people to suffer so that the egos of their kings were fed. He
instituted a system where a Rajya Sabha , the ruling council , consisting of all Brahmins
and Kshatriyas of a specific rank, was created. Whenever the Emperor died or took
sanyas, the council would meet and elect a new Emperor from amongst Kshatriyas of
the rank of brigadier or above. The decision could not be contested and was inviolate.’
‘I have said it before and I’ll say it again,’ said Shiva with a broad smile. ‘Lord Ram was
a genius.’
‘Yes, he was,’ said Sati, enthusiastically. ‘Jai Shri Ram.’
‘Jai Shri Ram,’ repeated Shiva. ‘But tell me, how come your father became the Emperor
after Lord Brahmanayak.
After all, his Highness is the first born of the previous
Emperor, correct?’
‘He was elected, just like every other Emperor of Meluha. Actually it was the first time in
Meluhan history that a ruling emperor’s son was elected Emperor,’ said Sati proudly.
‘Hmm. But your grandfather helped your father get elected?’
‘I’ve never been sure about that. I know my grandfather would have liked it if my father
had become Emperor. But I also know that he was a great man who followed the rules
of Meluha and would not openly help his son. Lord Bhrigu, a great sage respected
across the land, helped my father a great deal in his election.’

 Shiva smiled at her tenderly running his hand across the side of her face. Sati closed
her eyes, exulting in the sensation. His hand glided along the side of her body to rest on
her hand again. He squeezed it softly.
Shiva was about to ask more about the relationship between Daksha and Lord Bhrigu
when the door suddenly swung open. Daksha, looking deeply exhausted, stormed in.
Following him were Veerini and Kanakhala. Shiva immediately withdrew his hand before
Daksha could see where it was. But Daksha had noticed the movement.
‘Father!’ cried a surprised Sati.
‘Sati, my child,’ sighed Daksha, kneeling next to Sati’s bed. Veerini knelt next to Daksha
and ran her hand lovingly over her daughter’s face. She was crying. Kanakhala
remained at the door and greeted Shiva with a formal namaste. Shiva returned
Kanakhala’s namaste with a beaming smile. Parvateshwar and Ayurvati waited next to
Kanakhala, politely leaving the royal family alone in their private moment. Nandi,
Veerbhadra and Krittika stood behind them. A discrete aide silently brought in two
chairs for the royal couple, placed them next to the bed and left just as quietly.
Daksha, Veerini and Kanakhala,
accompanied
by two thousand soldiers, had
immediately left Devagiri on hearing the news of Sati’s injury. They had sailed down the
Saraswati to the inland delta of the river and then had ridden night and day to reach
Koonj.
‘I am alright, father,’ said Sati, holding her mother’s hand gently. Turning towards her
mother, she continued, ‘Seriously, mother. I am feeling better than ever. Give me one
more week and I’ll dance for you!’
Shiva smiled gently at Sati as Daksha and Veerini broke into a weak laugh.
Looking at her father, Sati continued, ‘I am sorry to have caused so much trouble. I
know there are much more important tasks at hand and you had to rush here.’
‘Trouble?’ asked Daksha. ‘My child, you are my life. You are nothing but a source of joy
for me. And at this point of time, you can’t imagine how proud I am of you.’
Veerini bent over and kissed Sati’s forehead tenderly.
‘I am proud of all of you,’ continued Daksha looking back at Parvateshwar and Ayurvati.
‘Proud that you supported the Lord in what had to be done. We actually fought back a
terrorist attack! You can’t imagine how much this has electrified the nation!’
Daksha soothingly continued to pat Sati’s hand, as he turned to Shiva and said, ‘Thank
you, my Lord. Thank you for fighting for us. We know now that we have put our faith in
the right man.’
Shiva could say nothing but smile awkwardly and acknowledge Daksha’s faith with a
slight nod and a courteous namaste.
Turning to Ayurvati, Daksha asked, ‘How is she now? I was told she is on her way to a
total recovery.’
‘Yes, your Highness,’ said Ayurvati. ‘She should be able to move in another week. And
in three weeks, the only memory of the wound would be a scar.’
‘You are not just the best doctor of this generation, Ayurvati,’ said Daksha proudly. You
are in fact the best doctor of all time.’
‘Oh no, your Highness,’ cried a flabbergasted Ayurvati, holding her ears gently to ward
off the evil spirits that might get angry at an undeserved compliment. ‘There are many
far greater than me. But in this case, the miracle was by the Lord Neelkanth, not me.’
Looking briefly towards a visibly embarrassed Shiva before turning back to Daksha,
Ayurvati continued, ‘I thought we had lost her. She got the terrible fever after we pulled
the agnibaan out. You know that there are no medicines to cure the agnibaan fever,
your Highness. But the Lord refused to lose hope. It was his idea to give her the
Somras.’
Daksha turned to Shiva with a grateful smile and said, ‘I have one more thing to thank
you for, my Lord. My daughter is part of my soul. I wouldn’t have been able to survive

 without her.’
‘Oh no, I did nothing,’ said Shiva, self-conscious. ‘It was Ayurvati who treated her.’
‘It is nothing but your humility speaking, my Lord,’ said Daksha. ‘You truly are a worthy
Neelkanth. In fact, you are a worthy Mahadev!’
An astounded Shiva stared at Daksha, his expression serious. He knew who the
previous Mahadev , the God of Gods , was. He did not believe he deserved to be
compared to Lord Rudra. His deeds did not qualify him for that.
‘No, your Highness. You speak too highly of me. I am no Mahadev.’
‘Oh yes you are, my Lord,’ said Kanakhala and Ayurvati almost simultaneously.
Parvateshwar looked on, silent.
Not wanting to press the issue as Shiva disliked being called Mahadev, Daksha turned
towards Sati, What I don’t understand is why you jumped in front of the Lord to take the
arrow. You have never believed in the legend. You have never had faith in the
Neelkanth like I have. Why then did you risk your own life for the Lord?’
Sati did not say anything. She looked down with an uncomfortable smile, embarrassed
and ill-at-ease. Daksha turned to Shiva to see him wearing the very same sheepish
expression as Sati’s. Veerini looked at her husband intently. She waited for him to rise
and speak to Shiva. Daksha suddenly stood up and walked around the bed towards
Shiva, holding his hands in a formal namaste. A surprised Shiva got up and returned
Daksha’s namaste formally, with a slight bow of his head.
‘My Lord, perhaps for the first time in her life, my daughter is tongue-tied in front of me,’
said Daksha. ‘And I have come to understand you over time. You will always give to
others but never ask anything for yourself. Hence I am going to make the first move
here.’
Shiva continued to stare at Daksha, frowning.
‘I will not lie to you, my Lord,’ continued Daksha. ‘The laws classify my daughter as a
vikarma, because she had given birth to a still-born decades back. It is not that serious
a crime. It could have been due to the past life karma of the child’s father. But the law of
the land is that both the father and mother be blamed for the tragedy. My darling
daughter was put in the category of a vikarma, because of this incident.’
Shiva looked at Daksha, but his expression was clear that he thought the vikarma law
unfair.
‘It is believed that vikarma people are carriers of bad fate,’ continued Daksha. ‘Hence if
she marries again, she will pass on her bad fate to her husband and possibly her future
children.’
Veerini looked at her husband with inscrutable eyes.
‘I know my daughter, my Lord,’ continued Daksha. ‘I have never seen her do anything
even remotely wrong. She is a good woman. In my opinion, the law that condemns her
is unfair. But I am only the Emperor. I cannot change the law.’
Parvateshwar glared angrily at Daksha, upset that he served an Emperor who held the
law in such low esteem.
‘It breaks my heart that I cannot give my daughter the happy life that she deserves,’
sobbed Daksha. ‘That I cannot save her from the humiliation that a good soul like her
suffers daily. What I can do, though, is ask you for help.’
Sati looked at her father with loving eyes.
‘You are the Neelkanth,’ continued Daksha. ‘In fact you are more than that. I genuinely
believe you are a Mahadev, even though I know you don’t like to be called that. You are
above the law. You can change the law if you wish. You can override it if you want.’
An aghast Parvateshwar glowered at Daksha. How could the Emperor be so dismissive
of the law? Then his eyes fell on Shiva. His heart sank further.
Shiva was staring at Daksha with undisguised delight. He had thought that he would
have to convince the Emperor about Sati. But here he was, quite sure that the Emperor

 was about to offer his daughter’s hand to him.
‘If you decide to take my daughter’s hand, my Lord, no power on earth can stop you,’
contended Daksha. ‘The question is: do you want to?’
All the emotions in the universe surged through Shiva’s being. His face bore an ecstatic
smile. He tried to speak but his voice was choked. He bent down, picked up Sati’s hand
gently brought it to his lips and kissed it lovingly. He looked up at Daksha and
whispered, ‘I will never let go of her. Never.’
A stunned Sati stared at Shiva. She had dared to love over the last week, but had not
dared to hope. And now her wildest dream was coming true. She was going to be his
wife.
An overjoyed Daksha hugged Shiva tightly and softly said, ‘My Lord!’
Veerini was sobbing uncontrollably. The unfairness done to Sati all her life had been set
right. She looked up at Daksha, almost willing to forgive him. Ayurvati and Kanakhala
entered the room and congratulated the Emperor, the Queen, Shiva and Sati. Nandi,
Krittika and Veerbhadra, who had heard the entire conversation, expressed their joy.
Parvateshwar stood rooted near the door, furious at such disregard for Lord Ram’s way.
Shiva, at long last, regained control of himself. Firmly gripping Sati’s hand, he looked at
Daksha, ‘But your Highness, I have a condition.’
‘Yes, my Lord.’
‘The vikarma law...’
‘It doesn’t need to be changed, my Lord,’ said Daksha. ‘If you decide to marry my
daughter, then the law cannot stop you.’
‘All the same,’ said Shiva. ‘That law must be changed.’
‘Of course, it will be my Lord,’ said a beaming Daksha. Turning towards Kanakhala, he
continued, ‘Make a proclamation to be signed by the Neelkanth, saying that from now
on any noble woman who gives birth to a still-born child will not be classified as
vikarma.’
‘No, your Highness,’ interrupted Shiva. ‘That is not what I asked. I want the entire
vikarma law scrapped. Nobody will be a vikarma from now on. Bad fate can strike
anyone. It is ridiculous to blame their past lives for it.’
Parvateshwar looked at Shiva in surprise. Though he did not like even a comma being
changed in any of Lord Ram’s laws, he appreciated that Shiva was remaining true to a
fundamental cannon of Lord Ram’s principles — the same law applies to everybody,
equally and fairly, without exceptions.
Daksha however looked at Shiva in shock. This was unexpected. Like all Meluhans, he
too was superstitious about the vikarma. His displeasure was not with the vikarma law
itself but with his daughter being classified as one. But he quickly recovered and said,
‘Of course, my Lord. The proclamation will state that the entire vikarma law has been
scrapped. Once you sign it, it will become law.’
‘Thank you, your Highness,’ smiled Shiva.
‘My daughter’s happy days are starting again,’ exulted Daksha, turning to Kanakhala. ‘I
want a grand ceremony at Devagiri when we return. A wedding the likes of which the
world has not seen before. The most magnificent wedding ever. Call in the best
organisers in the land. I want no expense spared.’
Daksha turned to look at Shiva for affirmation. Shiva looked at Sati to admire her joyous
smile and glorious dimples. Turning towards Daksha, he said, ‘All I want, your
Highness, is to get married to Sati. I wouldn’t mind the simplest ceremony in the world
or the most magnificent. As long as all of you, Brahaspati and the Gunas are present, I
will be happy’
‘Excellent!’ rejoiced Daksha.

  
CHAPTER 19
Love Realised
 
There was an air of celebration in Devagiri when the royal caravan arrived three weeks
later. Kanakhala, who had arrived in Devagiri earlier, ensured that all the preparations
for the most-eagerly awaited wedding in a millennium had been accomplished. Her
arrangements, as always, had been impeccable.
The various wedding ceremonies and celebrations had been spread over seven days,
each day with an exuberant variety of events. By the usually sober Suryavanshi
standards, the city had been decorated extravagantly. Colourful banners hung proudly
from the city walls, splashing festive beauty on the sober grey exteriors. The roads had
been freshly tiled in the sacred blue colour. All the restaurants and shops served their
customers free of charge for the seven days of revelry, subsidised at state expense. All
the buildings had been freshly painted at government cost to make Devagiri appear like
a city that had settled the previous day.
A massive channel had been rapidly dug along the far side of the Saraswati where a
part of the river had been diverted. The channel was in the open in some parts and went
underground in others. Filters injected a red dye into the water as soon as it entered the
channel and removed it just as efficiently when the water flowed back into the river. The
channel formed a giant Swastika , an ancient symbol which literally translates to ‘that
which is associated
with well-being ’ or very simply, a lucky charm. From any of the three
city platforms, a Meluhan could look in reverence at the enormous impression of the
revered Swastika in the royal red Suryavanshi colour formed by the flow of the holy
Saraswati. Some of the protective giant spikes around the entry drawbridges of the
three platforms had been cleared. In their stead, giant rangolis, visible from miles away,
had been drawn to welcome all into the capital. Kanakhala had wanted to clear all the
spikes surrounding Devagiri, but Parvateshwar had vetoed it, citing security reasons.
Elite families from across the empire had been invited to attend the festivities. People of
distinction ranging from governors to scientists, generals to artists and even sanyasis
had trooped into Devagiri to celebrate the momentous occasion. Ambassadors
of
eminent countries, such as Mesopotamia and Egypt, had been given permits for a rare
visit to the capital of Meluha. Jhooleshwar had cannily used the distinctive honour
granted to ambassadors to wrangle some additional trade quotas. Brahaspati had come
down from Mount Mandar with his retinue. Only a skeletal security staff of Arishtanemi
soldiers had been left behind at the mountain. It was the first time in history that seven
days would elapse at Mount Mandar without any experiments!
The first day had two pujas organised in the name of Lord Indra and Lord Agni. They
were the main gods for the people of India and their blessings were sought before any
event. And an event as momentous as the wedding of the millennium could only begin
with their sanction. This particular puja, however, celebrated their warrior form. Daksha
eloquently explained the reason. The Meluhans were not just celebrating the marriage
between the Neelkanth and their princess. They were also celebrating the massive
defeat of the despised terrorists at Koonj. According to him, the echoes of Koonj would
reverberate deep in the heart of Swadweep. The Suryavanshi vengeance had begun!
This puja was followed by the formal marriage ceremonies of Shiva and Sati. Though
some of the celebrations were still on, Shiva excused himself and tugged Sati along
with him.

 ‘By the Holy Lake!’ exclaimed Shiva, shutting the door to their private chamber behind
him. ‘This is only the first day! Is every day going to be as long?’
‘It doesn’t seem to make a difference to you! You walked out when you pretty well
pleased!’ teased Sati.
‘I don’t care about those damn ceremonies!’ growled Shiva, ripping his ceremonial
turban off and flinging it aside. He stared at Sati fervently, slowly moving towards her,
his breathing heavy.
‘Oh yes of course,’ mocked Sati, with a playfully theatrical expression. ‘The Neelkanth
gets to decide what is important and what is not. The Neelkanth can do anything he
wants.’
‘Oh yes he can!’
Sati laughed mischievously and ran to the other side of the bed. Shiva dashed towards
her from the opposite side hurling his angvastram off in one smooth motion.
‘Oh yes he can...’

 
‘Remember what I told you to say,’ whispered Nandi to Veerbhadra. ‘Don’t worry. The
Lord will give his permission.’
‘What...’ whispered a groggy Shiva as he was woken up gently by Sati.
‘Wake up, Shiva,’ whispered Sati tenderly, her hair falling over his face, teasing his
cheeks. ‘Careful now,’ murmured Sati softly, as Shiva looked at her longingly. ‘Nandi,
Krittika and Veerbhadra are waiting at the door. They have something important to tell
you.’
‘Hmmm?’ growled Shiva, as he walked towards the door and glared at the trio. ‘What is
it Nandi? Isn’t there someone beautiful in your life that you would like to bother at this
hour instead of troubling me?’
‘There’s nobody like you, my Lord,’ said Nandi, with a low bow and a chaste namaste.
‘Nandi, you better stop this nonsense or you are going to remain a bachelor all your life!’
joked Shiva.
As everybody laughed out loud, Krittika remained anxious about the task at hand.
‘Well, what did you want to talk about?’ asked Shiva.
Nandi nudged Veerbhadra roughly. Shiva turned to Veerbhadra with a quizzical look.
‘Bhadra, since when do you need the support of so many people to speak to me?’
asked Shiva.
‘Shiva...’ murmured Veerbhadra nervously.
‘Yes?’
‘It’s like this...’
‘It’s like what?’
‘Well, you see...’
‘I am seeing Bhadra.’
‘Shiva, please don’t make him more nervous than he is,’ said Sati. Looking towards
Veerbhadra, she continued, ‘Veerbhadra, speak fearlessly. You haven’t done anything
wrong.’
‘Shiva,’ whispered Veerbhadra timidly, his cheeks the colour of beetroot. ‘I need your
permission.’
‘Permission granted,’ said Shiva, amused by now. ‘Whatever it is that you want it for.’
‘Actually, I am considering getting married.’
‘A capital idea!’ said Shiva. ‘Now all you have to do is convince some blind woman to
marry you!’
‘Shiva!’ reprimanded Sati gently.
‘Well, I’ve already found a woman,’ said Veerbhadra, before his courage could desert

 him. ‘And she’s not blind...’
‘Not blind?!’ exclaimed Shiva, his eyebrows humorously arched in wide disbelief. ‘Then
she is stupid enough to tie herself for the next seven births to a man who wants
someone else to determine his marriage!’
Veerbhadra gazed at Shiva with an odd mixture of embarrassment,
contrition and
incomprehension.
‘I have told you before, Bhadra,’ said Shiva, ‘There are many customs of our tribe that I
don’t like. And one of the primary ones amongst them is that the leader has to approve
the bride of any tribesman. Don’t you remember how we made fun of this ridiculous
tradition as children?’
Veerbhadra glanced at Shiva and immediately down again, still unsure.
‘For god’s sake man, if you are happy with her, then I am happy for you,’ said an
exasperated Shiva. ‘You have my permission.’
Veerbhadra looked up in surprised ecstasy as Nandi nudged him again. Krittika looked
at Veerbhadra, as a long held breath escaped with massive relief. She turned to Sati
and silently mouthed the words, ‘Thank you.’
Shiva walked towards Krittika and hugged her warmly. A startled Krittika held back for
an instant, before the warmth of the Neelkanth conquered her Suryavanshi reserve. She
returned the embrace.
‘Welcome to the tribe,’ whispered Shiva. ‘We are quite mad, but at heart we are good
people!’
‘But how did you know,’ said Veerbhadra. ‘I never told you that I loved her.’
‘I am not blind, Bhadra,’ smiled Shiva.
‘Thank you,’ said Krittika to Shiva. ‘Thank you for accepting me.’
Shiva stepped back and said, ‘No. Thank you . I was always concerned about Bhadra.
He is a good, dependable man, but too simple-minded about women. I was worried
about how married life would treat him. But there is no reason to worry anymore.’
‘Well, I too want to tell you something,’ said Krittika. ‘I had never believed in the legend
of the Neelkanth. But if you can do to Meluha what you have done to my lady, then you
are worthy of even being called the Mahadev!’
‘I don’t want to be called the Mahadev, Krittika. You know I love Meluha as much as I
love Sati. I will do all that I possibly can.’ Turning towards Veerbhadra, Shiva ordered,
‘Come here, you stupid oaf!’
Veerbhadra came forward, embraced Shiva affectionately and whispered, ‘Thank you.’
‘Don’t be stupid. There’s no need for a “thank you“!’ said Shiva with a grin.
Veerbhadra smiled broadly.
‘And listen!’ snarled Shiva in mock anger. ‘You are going to answer to your best friend
over the next chillum we share on how you dared to love another woman for so long
without even speaking to me about it!’
Everybody laughed out loud.
‘Will a good batch of marijuana make up for it?’ asked Veerbhadra, smiling.
‘Well, I’ll think about it!’

 
‘Doesn’t she look tired?’ asked a concerned Ayurvati, looking at Sati.
Sati had just gotten up from the player platform as she and her mother had been
excused for this particular ceremony. This was only for the bridegroom and the fatherin-law. The pandits were preparing for the puja, which would take a few moments.
‘Well, it has been six days of almost continuous celebrations and pujas,’ said
Kanakhala. ‘Though it is the custom that all this be done for a royal wedding, I can
understand her being tired.’

 ‘Oh, I wouldn’t say it has anything to do with the six days of pujas,’ said Brahaspati.
‘No?’ asked Kanakhala.
‘No,’ answered Brahaspati, mischievously. ‘I think it has to do with the five nights ’
‘What?’ exclaimed Ayurvati, then blushed a deep red as the meaning of Brahaspati’s
words dawned on her.
Parvateshwar, who was sitting next to Kanakhala, glared at Brahaspati for the highly
improper remark. Brahaspati guffawed as the ladies giggled quietly. An assistant pandit
turned around in irritation. But on seeing the seniority of the Brahmins sitting behind
him, he immediately swallowed his annoyance and returned to his preparations.
Parvateshwar
however had no such compunctions. ‘I can’t believe the kind of
conversation I am being forced to endure!’ He rose to walk to the back of the
congregation.
This made even Kanakhala and Ayurvati to chortle. One of the senior pandits turned to
signal that the ceremony was about to begin, making them fall silent immediately.
The pandits resumed the invocations of the shlokas. Both Shiva and Daksha continued
to pour the ceremonial ghee into the sacred fire at regular intervals while saying,
‘Swaha’.
In between two successive swahas, there was enough time for Shiva and Daksha to
talk softly to each other. They spoke of Sati. And only Sati. To any neutral observer, it
would have been difficult to decide who loved the princess more. The pandit took a
momentary break in his recitation of the shlokas, the cue for Shiva and Daksha to pour
some more ghee into the sacred fire with a ‘Swaha.’ A little ghee spilled onto Daksha
hands. As Shiva immediately pulled the napkin on his side to wipe it off, he noticed the
chosen-tribe amulet on Daksha’s arm. He was stunned on seeing the animal there, but
had the good sense to not make a comment. Daksha meanwhile had also turned and
noticed Shiva’s gaze.
‘It wasn’t my choice. My father chose it for me,’ said Daksha, with a warm smile, while
wiping the ghee off his hands. There was not a hint of embarrassment in his voice. If
one looked closely though, one could see just a hint of defiance in his eyes.
‘Oh no, your Highness,’ mumbled Shiva, a little mortified. ‘I didn’t mean to look. Please
accept my apologies.’
‘Why should you apologise, my Lord?’ asked Daksha. ‘It is my chosen-tribe. It is worn
on the arm so that everyone can see it and classify me.’
‘But you are much beyond your chosen-tribe, your Highness,’ said Shiva politely. ‘You
are a far greater man than what that amulet symbolises.’
‘Yes,’ smiled Daksha. ‘I really showed the old man, didn’t I? The Neelkanth did not
choose to appear in his reign. He came in mine. The terrorists were not defeated in his
reign. They were defeated in mine. And the Chandravanshis were not reformed in his
reign. They will be reformed in mine.’
Shiva smiled cautiously. Something about the conversation niggled at him. He took one
more glance at the amulet on Daksha’s arm. It represented a humble goat, one of the
lowest chosen-tribes amongst the Kshatriyas. In fact, some people considered the goat
chosen-tribe to be so low that its wearer could not even be called a full Kshatriya. Shiva
turned back towards the sacred fire on receiving the verbal cue from the pandit.
Scooping some more ghee, he poured it into the fire with a ‘Swaha’.

 
At nightfall, in the privacy of their chambers, Shiva had considered asking Sati about the
relationship between Emperor Brahmanayak and his son, Daksha. But for some reason,
his instincts told him that he would have to be careful in how he asks the questions.
‘How was the relationship between Lord Brahmanayak and your father?’

 Sati stopped playing with Shiva’s flowing locks. She took a deep breath and whispered,
‘It was strained at times. They were very different characters. But Lord Bhrigu...’
The conversation was interrupted by knocking at the door.
‘What is it?’ growled Shiva.
‘My Lord,’ Taman, the doorkeeper,
announced nervously. ‘The Chief Scientist
Brahaspatiji has requested an audience with you. He insists that he must meet with you
tonight.’
Shiva was always happy to meet Brahaspati. But before answering the doorkeeper, he
looked at Sati with a raised eyebrow. Sati smiled and nodded. She knew of the
importance that Shiva attached to his relationship with Brahaspati.
‘Let Brahaspatiji in, Taman.’
‘Yes, my Lord.’
‘My friend,’ said Brahaspati. ‘My apologies for disturbing you so late.’
‘You never need to apologise to me, my friend,’ answered Shiva.
‘Namaste, Brahaspatiji,’ said Sati, bending to touch the Chief Scientist’s feet.
‘Akhand saubhagyavati
bhav ,’ said Brahaspati, blessing Sati with the traditional
invocation that may her husband always be alive and by her side .
‘Well,’ said Shiva to Brahaspati, ‘what is so important that you had to pull yourself out of
bed so late at night?’
‘Actually, I didn’t get the chance to speak to you earlier.’
‘I know,’ said Shiva, smiling towards Sati. ‘Our days have been full with one ceremony
after another.’
‘I know,’ said Brahaspati nodding. ‘We Suryavanshis love ceremonies! In any case, I
wanted to come and speak with you personally, since I have to leave for Mount Mandar
tomorrow morning’
‘What?’ asked a surprised Shiva. ‘You have survived all this for the last six days. Surely
you can survive one more?’
‘I know,’ said Brahaspati, crinkling his eyes apologetically. ‘I would have loved to stay
but there is an experiment that had already been scheduled. The preparations have
been going on for months. The Mesopotamian material required for it has already been
prepared. We are going to test the stability of the Somras with lesser quantities of water.
I have to go early to check that the experiment starts correctly. My other scientists will
remain here to keep you company!’
‘Right,’ said Shiva sarcastically.
‘I really do love their constant theorising about
everything under the sun.’
Brahaspati laughed. ‘I really do have to go, Shiva. I am sorry’
‘No need to apologise, my friend,’ said Shiva smiling. ‘Life is long. And the road to
Mount Mandar short. You are not going to get rid of me that easily.’
Brahaspati smiled, his eyes full of love towards a man he had come to consider his
brother. He stepped forward and hugged Shiva tightly. Shiva was a little surprised. It
was usually Shiva who would move to embrace Brahaspati first, and Brahaspati would
normally respond later, a little tentatively.
‘My brother,’ whispered Brahaspati.
‘Ditto,’ mumbled Shiva.
Stepping slightly back but still holding Shiva’s arms, Brahaspati said, ‘I would go
anywhere for you. Even into Patallok if it would help you.’
‘I would never take you there, my friend,’ answered Shiva with a grin, thinking that he
himself wasn’t about to venture into Patallok , the land of the demons .
Brahaspati smiled warmly at Shiva. ‘I hope to see you soon, Shiva.’
‘You can count on it!’
Turning to Sati, Brahaspati said, ‘Take care, my child. It is so good to see you finally get
the life you deserve.’

 ‘Thank you, Brahaspatiji.’

  
CHAPTER 20
Attack on Mandar
 
‘How are you, my friend?’
‘What the hell am I doing here?’ asked a starded Shiva.
He found himself sitting in the Brahma temple in Meru. Sitting in front of him was the
Pandit whom he had met during his first visit to Meru, many months back.
‘You called me here,’ said the Pandit smiling.
‘But how and when did I get here?’ asked Shiva, astounded.
‘As soon as you went to sleep,’ replied the Pandit. ‘This is a dream.’
‘I’ll be damned!’
‘Why do you swear so much?’ asked the Pandit frowning.
‘I only swear when the occasion demands,’ grinned Shiva. ‘And what’s wrong with
swearing?’
‘Well, I think it reflects poor manners. It shows, perhaps, a slight deficiency in character.’
‘On the contrary, I think it shows tremendous character. It shows you have the strength
and passion to speak your mind.’
The Pandit guffawed, shaking his head slightiy.
‘In any case,’ continued Shiva. ‘Since you are here, why don’t you tell me what your
people are called? I was promised I would be told the next time I met one of you.’
‘But you haven’t met one of us again. This is a dream. I can only tell you what you
already know,’ said the Pandit, smiling mysteriously. ‘Or something that already exists in
your consciousness that you haven’t chosen to listen to as yet.’
‘So that’s what this is about! You are here to help me find something I already know!’
‘Yes,’ said the Pandit, his smile growing more enigmatic.
‘Well, what is it that we are supposed to talk about?’
‘The colour of that leaf,’ beamed the Pandit, pointing towards the many trees that could
be seen from the temple, through its ostentatiously carved pillars.
‘The colour of that leaf?!’
‘Yes.’
Frowning strongly, Shiva sighed, ‘Why, in the name of the Holy Lake, is the colour of
that leaf important?’
‘Many times a good conversational journey to find knowledge makes attaining it that
much more satisfying,’ said the Pandit. ‘And more importantly, it helps you understand
the context of the knowledge much more easily.’
‘Context of the knowledge?’
‘Yes. All knowledge has its context. Unless you know the context, you may not
understand the point.’
‘And I’ll know all that by talking about the colour of that leaf?’
‘Yes.’
‘By the Holy Lake, man!’ groaned Shiva. ‘Let’s talk about the leaf then.’
‘All right,’ laughed the Pandit. ‘Tell me. What is the colour of that leaf?’
‘The colour? It’s green.’
‘Is it?’
‘Isn’t it?
‘Why do you think it appears green to you?’
‘Because,’ said Shiva, amused, ‘it is green.’

 ‘No. That wasn’t what I was trying to ask. You had a conversation with one of
Brahaspati’s scientists about how the eyes see. Didn’t you?’
‘Oh that, right,’ said Shiva slapping his forehead. ‘Light falls on an object. And when it
reflects back from that object to your eyes, you see that object.’
‘Exactly! And you had another conversation with another scientist about what normal
white sunlight is made of.’
‘Yes, I did. White light is nothing but the confluence of seven different colours. That is
why the rainbow is made up of seven colours since it is formed when raindrops disperse
sunlight.’
‘Correct! Now put these two theories together and answer my question. Why does that
leaf appear green to you?’
Shiva frowned as his mind worked the problem out. White sunlight falls on that leaf. The
leaf’s physical properties are such that it absorbs
the colours violet, indigo, blue,
yellow, orange and red. It doesn’t absorb the colour green, which is then reflected back
to my eyes. Hence I see the leaf as green.’
‘Exactly!’ beamed the Pandit. ‘So think about the colour of that leaf from the perspective
of the leaf itself. What colour it absorbs and what it rejects. Is its colour green? Or is it
every single colour in the world, except green?’
Shiva was stunned into silence by the simplicity of the argument being presented to
him.
‘There are many realities. There are many versions of what may appear obvious,’
continued the Pandit. ‘Whatever appears as the unshakeable truth, the exact opposite
may also be true in another context. It is the context or perspective that you’re looking
from that moulds which particular reality you see.’
Shiva turned slowly towards the leaf again. Its lustrous green colour shone through in
the glorious sunlight.
‘Are your eyes capable of seeing another reality?’ asked the Pandit.
Shiva continued to stare at the leaf as it gradually altered its appearance. The colour
seemed to be dissolving out of the leaf as its bright green hue gradually grew lighter and
lighter. It slowly reduced itself to a shade of grey. As a stunned Shiva continued to
stare, even the grey seemed to dissolve slowly, till the leaf was almost transparent. Only
its outline could be discerned. There appeared to be numerous curved lines of two
colours, black and white, moving in and out of the outline of the leaf. It almost appeared
as if the leaf was nothing but a carrier, which the black and white curved lines used as a
temporary stop on their eternal journey.
It took some time for Shiva to realise that the surrounding leaves had also been
transformed into their outlines. As his eyes panned, he noticed that the entire tree had
magically transformed into an outline, with the black and white curved lines flowing in
and out, easily and smoothly. He turned his head to soak in the panorama. Every
object, from the squirrels on the trees to the pillars of the temple had all been
transformed into outlines of their selves. The same black and white curved lines
streamed in and out of them.
Turning to the Pandit to ask for an explanation, he was stunned to see that the priest
himself was also transformed into an outline of his former self. White curved lines were
flooding out of him with frightening intensity. Strangely though, there were no black lines
around him.
‘What the...’
Shiva’s words were stopped by the outline of the Pandit pointing back at him. ‘Look at
yourself, my Karmasaafhi,’ advised the Pandit.
Shiva looked down. ‘I’ll be damned!’
His body too had been transformed into an outline, completely transparent inside.
Torrents of black curved lines were gushing furiously into him. He looked at the lines

 closely to notice that that they were not lines at all. They were, in fact, tiny waves which
were jet black in colour. The waves were so tiny that from even a slight distance, they
appeared like lines. There wasn’t even a hint of the white waves close to Shiva’s
outlined body. ‘What the hell is going on?’
‘The white waves are positive energy and the black negative,’ said the Pandit’s outline.
‘They are both important. Their balance crucial. If they fall out of sync, cataclysm will
occur.’
Shiva looked up at the Pandit, puzzled. ‘So why is there no positive energy around me?
And no negative energy around you?’
‘Because we balance each other. The Vishnu’s role is to transmit positive energy’ said
the Pandit. The white lines pouring feverishly out of the Pandit seemed to flutter a bit
whenever he spoke. ‘And the Mahadev’s role is to absorb the negative. Search for it.
Search for negative energy and you will fulfil your destiny as a Mahadev.’
‘But I am no Mahadev. My deeds till now don’t make me deserve that tide.’
‘It doesn’t work that way, my friend. You don’t earn a tide after you have done your
deeds. You do your deeds because of and only after you believe that you already are
the Mahadev. It doesn’t matter what others think. It’s about what you believe. Believe
you are the Mahadev, and you will be one.’
Shiva frowned.
‘Believe!’ repeated the Pandit.
BOOM! A distant reverberation echoed through the ambience. Shiva turned his eyes
towards the horizon.
‘It sounds like an explosion,’ whispered the Pandit’s outline.
The distant, insistent voice of Sati came riding in. ‘S-H-I-V-A...’
BOOM! Another explosion.
‘S-H-I-V-A...’
‘It looks like your wife needs you, my friend.’
Shiva looked in astonishment at the outline of the Pandit, unable to decipher where the
sound came from.
‘Maybe you should wake up,’ advised the Pandit’s disembodied voice.
‘S-H-I-V-A’
A groggy Shiva woke up to find Sati staring at him with concern. He was still a little
bleary from the outlandishly strange dream state that he had just been yanked out of.
‘Shiva!’
BOOM!
‘What the hell was that?’ cried Shiva, alert now.
‘Someone is using daivi astras!’
‘What? What are daivi astras? ’
A clearly stunned Sati spoke agitatedly, ‘Divine weapons ! But Lord Rudra destroyed all
the daivi astras! Nobody has access to them anymore!’
Shiva was completely alert by now, his battle instincts primed. ‘Sati, get ready. Wear
your armour. Bind your weapons.’
Sati responded swiftly. Shiva slipped on his armour, coupled his shield to it and tied his
sword to his waist. He slipped on his quiver smoothly and picked up his bow. Noting that
Sati was ready, he kicked the door open. Taman and eight other guards had their
swords drawn, ready to defend their Neelkanth against any attack.
‘My Lord, you should wait inside,’ said Taman. ‘We will hold the attackers here.’
Shiva stared hard at Taman, his eyes frowning at Taman’s well–intentioned words.
Taman immediately stepped aside. ‘I am sorry, my Lord. We will follow you.’
Before Shiva could react, they heard footsteps rushing in their hallway. Shiva
immediately drew his sword. He strained his ears to assess the threat.
Four footsteps. Just two men to attack a royal hallway! This didn’t make sense.

 One pair of footsteps dragged slightly. The terrorist was clearly a large man using
considerable willpower to make his feet move faster than his girth allowed.
‘Stand down, soldiers,’ ordered Shiva suddenly. ‘They are friends.’
Nandi and Veerbhadra emerged around the corner, running hard, with their swords at
the ready.
‘Are you alright, my Lord?’ asked Nandi, admirably not out of breath.
‘Yes. We are all safe. Did the two of you face any attacks?’
‘No,’ answered Veerbhadra, frowning. ‘What the hell is going on?’
‘I don’t know,’ said Shiva. ‘But we’re going to find out.’
‘Where’s Krittika?’ asked Sati.
‘Safe in her room,’ answered Veerbhadra. ‘There are five soldiers with her. The room is
barred from the inside.’
Sati nodded, before turning to Shiva. ‘What now?’
‘I want to check on the Emperor first. Everybody, files of two. Keep your shields up for
cover. Sati at my side. Nandi in the middle. Taman, Veerbhadra, at the rear. Don’t light
any torches. We know the way. Our enemies don’t.’
The platoon moved with considerable speed and stealth, mindful of possible surprise
attacks from the terrorists. Shiva was troubled by what he had heard. Or rather, what he
didn’t. Apart from the repeated explosions, there was absolutely no other sound from
the palace. No screams of terror. No sound of panicked footsteps. No clash of steel.
Nothing. Either the terrorists had not begun their real attack as yet. Or, Shiva was late
and the attack was already over. Shiva frowned as a third alternative occurred to him.
Maybe there were no terrorists in the palace itself. Maybe the attack was being mounted
from a distance, with the daivi astras that Sati spoke of.
Shiva’s platoon reached Daksha’s chambers to find his guards at the door tense and
ready for battle.
‘Where is the Emperor?’ asked Shiva.
‘He is inside, my Lord,’ said the royal guard captain, recognising the Neelkanth’s
silhouette immediately. ‘Where are they, my Lord? We’ve been waiting for an attack
since the first explosion.’
‘I don’t know, Captain,’ replied Shiva. ‘Stay here and block the doorway. Taman, support
the captain here with your men. And remain alert’
Shiva opened the Emperor’s door. ‘Your Highness?’
‘My Lord? Is Sati all right?’ asked Daksha.
‘Yes, she is, your Highness,’ said Shiva, as Sati, Nandi and Veerbhadra followed him
into the chamber. ‘And the Queen?’
‘Shaken. But not too scared.’
‘What was that?’
‘I don’t know,’ answered Daksha. ‘I would suggest that you and Sati stay here for now
till we know what’s going on.’
‘Perhaps it maybe advisable for you to stay here, your Highness. We cannot risk any
harm coming to you. I am going out to help Parvateshwar. If there’s a terrorist attack on,
we need all the strength we have.’
‘You don’t have to go, my Lord. This is Devagiri. Our soldiers will slay all the terrorists
dim-witted enough to attack our capital.’
Before Shiva could respond, there was a loud insistent knocking on the door.
‘Your Highness? Request permission to enter.’
‘Parvateshwar
!’ thought Daksha. ‘Observing
protocol even at a time like this !’
‘Come in!’ growled Daksha. As Parvateshwar entered, Daksha let fly. ‘How in Lord
Indra’s name can this happen, General? An attack on Devagiri? How dare they?’
‘Your Highness,’ intercepted Shiva. Sati, Nandi and Veerbhadra were in the chambers
now. He could not allow Parvateshwar to be insulted in front of them, especially in front

 of Sati. ‘Let us find out what is going on first.’
‘The attack is not on Devagiri, your Highness,’ glared Parvateshwar, his impatience with
his Emperor on edge. ‘My scouts saw massive plumes of smoke coming from the
direction of Mount Mandar. I believe it is under attack. I have already given orders for
my troops and the station Arishtanemi to be ready. We leave in an hour. I need your
approval to depart.’
‘The explosions were in Mandar, Pitratulya?’ asked Sati incredulously. ‘How powerful
were they to be heard in Devagiri.’
Parvateshwar looked gloomily at Sati, his silence conveying his deepest fears. He
turned towards Daksha. ‘Your Highness?’
Daksha seemed stunned into silence. Or was that a frown on his eyes. Parvateshwar
could not be sure in the dim light.
‘Guards, light the torches!’ ordered Parvateshwar. ‘There is no attack on Devagiri!’
As the torches spread their radiance, Parvateshwar
repeated, ‘Do I have your
permission, my Lord?’
Daksha nodded softly.
Parvateshwar turned to see Shiva looking shocked. ‘What happened, Shiva?’
‘Brahaspati left for Mount Mandar yesterday.’
‘What?’ asked a startled Parvateshwar,
who had not noticed the chief scientist’s
absence in the celebrations of the previous day. ‘O Lord Agni!’
Shiva turned slowly towards Sati, drawing strength from her presence.
‘I will find him, Shiva,’ consoled Parvateshwar. ‘I am sure he is alive. I will find him.’
‘I’m coming with you,’ said Shiva.
‘And so am I,’ said Sati.
‘What?’ asked Daksha, the light making his agonised expression clear. ‘You both don’t
need to go.’
Shiva turned to Daksha, frowning. ‘My apologies, your Highness. But I must go.
Brahaspati needs me.’
As Parvateshwar and Shiva turned to leave the royal chambers, Sati bent down to touch
her father’s feet. Daksha seemed too dazed to bless her and Sati did not want to remain
too far behind her husband. She quickly turned to touch her mother’s feet.
‘Ayushman bhav ’ said Veerini.
Sati frowned at the odd blessing — ‘May you live long ’. She was going into a battle. She
wanted victory, not a long life! But there was little time to argue. Sati turned and raced
behind Shiva as Nandi and Veerbhadra followed closely.

  
CHAPTER 21
Preparation for War
 
The noise of the explosions stopped within an hour of the first. It wasn’t much later that
Shiva, Parvateshwar, Sati, Nandi and Veerbhadra, accompanied by a brigade of one
thousand five hundred cavalry, were on their way to Mount Mandar. Brahaspati’s
scientists rode with the brigade, sick with worry over their leader’s fate. They rode hard
and hoped to cover the day—long distance to the mountain in fewer than eight hours. It
was almost at the end of the second prahar, with the sun directly overhead that the
brigade turned the last corner of the road where the forest cover cleared to give them
their first glimpse of the mountain.
A furious cry arose as they got their first sight of what was the heart of their empire.
Mandar had been ruthlessly destroyed. The mountain had a colossal crater at its centre.
It was almost as if a giant Asura had struck his massive hands right through the core of
the mountain and scooped out its core. The enormous buildings of science were in
ruins, their remnants scattered across the plains below. The giant churners at the
bottom of mountain were still functioning, their eerie sound making the gruesome
picture even more macabre.
‘Brahaspati!’ roared Shiva, as he rode hard, right into the heart of the mountain, where
the pathway, miraculously, still stood strong.
‘Wait Shiva,’ called out Parvateshwar. ‘It could be a trap.’
Shiva, unmindful of any danger, continued to gallop up the pathway through the
devastated heart of the mountain. The brigade, with Parvateshwar and Sati in the lead,
rode fast, trying to keep up with their Neelkanth. They reached the top to be horrified by
the sight they saw. Parts of the buildings hung limply on broken foundations, some
structures still smouldering. Scorched and unrecognisable body parts, ripped apart by
the repeated explosions, were strewn all over. It was impossible to even identify the
dead.
Shiva tumbled off his horse, his face devoid of even a ray of hope. Nobody could have
survived such a lethal attack. ‘Brahaspati...’

 
‘How did the terrorists get their hands on the daivi astras?’ asked an agitated
Parvateshwar, the fire of vengeance blazing within him.
The soldiers had been ordered to collect all the body parts and cremate them in
separate pyres, to help the departed on their onward journey. A manifest was being
drawn up of the names of those believed dead. The first name on the list was that of
Brahaspati, Chief Scientist of Meluha, Sarayupaari Brahmin, Swan chosen-tribe. The
others were mostly Arishtanemi, assigned to the task of protecting Mandar. It was a
small consolation that the casualties were minimal since most of the mountain’s
residents were in Devagiri for the Neelkanth’s marriage. The list was going to be sent to
the great sanyasis in Kashmir, whose powers over the spiritual force were considered
second to none. If the sanyasis could be cajoled into reciting prayers for these departed
souls, it was hoped that their grisly death in this birth would not mar their subsequent
births.
‘It could have also been the Somras, general,’ said Panini, one of Brahaspati’s assistant

 chief scientists, offering another plausible cause.
Shiva looked up suddenly on hearing Panini’s words.
‘The Somras did this! How?’ asked a disbelieving Sati.
‘The Somras is very unstable during its manufacturing process,’ continued Panini. ‘It is
kept stable by using copious quantities of the Saraswati waters. One of our main
projects was to determine whether we could stabilise the Somras using less water.
Much lesser than at present.’
Shiva remembered Brahaspati talking about this. He leaned over to listen intendly to
Panini.
‘It was one of the dream projects of...’ Panini found it hard to complete the statement.
The thought that Brahaspati, the greatest scientist of his generation, the father-figure to
all the learned men at Mount Mandar, was gone, was too much for Panini to bear. He
was too choked to release the intense pain he felt inside. He stopped talking, shut his
eyes and hoped the terrible moment would pass. Regaining a semblance of control over
himself, he continued, ‘It was one of Brahaspatiji’s dream projects. He had come back
to organise the experiment that was to begin today. He didn’t want us to miss the last
day of the celebrations. So he came alone.’
Parvateshwar was numb. ‘You mean this could have been an accident.’
‘Yes,’ replied Panini. ‘We all knew the experiment was risky. Maybe that is why
Brahaspatiji decided to begin without us.’
The entire room was stunned into silence by this unexpected information. Panini
retreated into his private hell. Parvateshwar
continued to gaze into the distance,
shocked by the turn of events. Sad stared at Shiva, holding his hand, deeply worried
about how her husband was taking the death of his friend. And that it may all have been
just a senseless mishap!

 
It was late into the first hour of the fourth prahar. It had been decided that the brigade
would set up camp at the bottom of the ruined mountain. They would leave the next
day, only after all the ceremonies for the departed had been completed. Two riders had
been dispatched to Devagiri with the news about Mandar. Parvateshwar and Sati sat at
the edge of the mountain peak, whispering to each other. The drone of Brahmin
scientists reciting Sanskrit shlokas at the bottom of the mountain floated up to create an
ethereal atmosphere of pathos. Nandi and Veerbhadra stood at attention, a polite
distance from Parvateshwar and Sati, looking at their Lord.
Shiva was walking around the ruins of the Mandar buildings, lost in thought. It was
tearing him apart that he hadn’t even seen any recognisable part of Brahaspati.
Everybody in Mandar had been destroyed beyond recognition. He desperately searched
for some sign of his friend. Something he could keep with himself. Something he could
cling on to. Something to soothe his tortured soul for the years of mourning he would go
through. He walked at a snail’s pace; his eyes combing the ground. They suddenly fell
upon an object he recognised only too well.
He slowly bent down to pick it up. It was a bracelet of leather, burnt at the edges, its
back-hold destroyed. The heat of the fiery explosions had scarred its brown colour into
black at most places. The centre however, with an embroidered design, lay
astonishingly unblemished. Shiva brought it close to his eyes.
The crimson hue of the setting sun caused the Aum symbol to glow. At the meeting
point of the top and bottom curve of the Aum were two serpent heads. The third curve,
surging out to the east, ended in a sharp serpent head, with its fork tongue struck out
threateningly.

  
It was him! He killed Brahaspati!
Shiva swung around, eyes desperately scanning the limbs scattered about, hoping to
find the owner of the bracelet or some part of him there. But there was nothing. Shiva
screamed silently. A scream audible only to him and Brahaspati’s wounded soul. He
clutched the bracelet in his fist till it’s still burning embers burnt into his palms. Clasping
it even more firmly, he swore a terrible vengeance. He vowed to bring upon the Naga a
death that would scar him for his next seven births. That Naga, and his entire army of
vice, would be arinihilated. Piece by bloody piece.
‘Shiva! Shiva!’ The insistent call yanked him back to reality.
Sati was standing in front of him, gently touching his hand. Parvateshwar stood next to
her, disturbed. Nandi and Veerbhadra stood to the other side.
‘Let it go, Shiva,’ said Sati.
Shiva continued to stare at her, blank.
‘Let it go, Shiva,’ repeated Sati softly. ‘It’s singeing your hand.’
Shiva opened his palm. Nandi immediately lunged forward to pull the bracelet out.
Screaming in surprised agony, Nandi dropped the bracelet as it scalded his hand. How
did the Lord hold it for so long?
Shiva immediately bent down and picked up the bracelet. This time carefully. His fingers
were holding the less charred edge, the part with the Aum symbol. He turned to
Parvateshwar. ‘It was not an accident.’
‘What?’ cried a startled Parvateshwar.
‘Are you sure?’ asked Sati.
Shiva looked towards Sati and raised the bracelet, the serpent Aum clearly in view. Sati
let out a gasp of shock. Parvateshwar, Nandi and Veerbhadra immediately closed in to
stare intently at the bracelet.
‘Naga...,’ whispered Nandi.
‘The same bastard who attacked Sati in Meru,’ growled Shiva. ‘The same Naga who
attacked us on our return from Mandar. The very, bloody, same, son of a bitch.’
‘He will pay for this Shiva,’ said Veerbhadra.
Turning towards Parvateshwar, Shiva said, ‘We ride to Devagiri tonight. We declare
war.’
Parvateshwar nodded.

 
The Meluhan war council sat quietly, observing five minutes of silence in honour of the
martyrs of Mandar. General Parvateshwar and his twenty-five brigadiers sat to the right
of Emperor Daksha. To Daksha’s left sat the Neelkanth, the administrative Brahmins led
by Prime Minister Kanakhala and the governors of the fifteen provinces.
‘The decision of the council is a given,’ said Daksha, beginning the proceedings. ‘The
question is when do we attack?’ ‘It will take us at the most a month to be ready to
march, your Highness,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘You know that there are no roads between
Meluha and Swadweep. Our army would have to travel through dense, impenetrable
forests. So even if we begin the march in a month, we will not be in Swadweep before
three months from today. So time is of the essence.’
‘Then let the preparations begin.’

 ‘Your Highness,’ said Kanakhala, adding a Brahmin voice of reason to the battle cry of
the Kshatriyas. ‘May I suggest an alternate?’
‘An alternate?’ asked a surprised Daksha.
‘Please don’t get me wrong,’ said Kanakhala. ‘I understand the rage of the entire nation
over Mandar. But we want vengeance against the perpetrators of the crime, not all of
Swadweep. Could we try and see whether a scalpel might work before we bring out the
mighty war sword?’
‘The path you suggest is one of cowardice, Kanakhala,’ said Parvateshwar.
‘No Parvateshwar, I am not suggesting that we sit like cowards and do nothing,’ said
Kanakhala politely. ‘I am only suggesting a way to see whether we can get our
vengeance without sacrificing the lives of our soldiers and other innocents.’
‘My soldiers are willing to shed their blood for the country, Madam Prime Minister.’
‘I know they are,’ said Kanakhala, maintaining her composure. ‘And I know that you too
are willing to shed your blood for Meluha. My point is that can we send an emissary to
Emperor Dilipa and request him to surrender the terrorists who perpetrated this attack?
We can threaten that if he doesn’t, we will attack with all the might at our disposal.’
His eyes scowling with impatience, Parvateshwar said, ‘Request
him? And why would
he listen? For decades, the Swadweepans have got away with their nefarious activities
because they think we don’t have the stomach for fight. And if we talk about this “scalpel
approach” after an outrage like Mount Mandar, they will be convinced that they can
mount any attack at will and we will not respond.’
‘I disagree, Parvateshwar,’
said Kanakhala. ‘They have mounted terrorist attacks
because they are scared that they cannot take us on in a direct fight. They are afraid
that they cannot withstand our superior technology and war-machines. I am only looking
from the standpoint of what Lord Shiva had said when he had first come here. Can we
try talking to them before we fight? This may be an opportunity to get them to admit that
there are sections in their society who are terrorists. If they hand them over, we may
even find ways of coexisting.’
‘I don’t think Shiva thinks like that anymore,’ said Parvateshwar, pointing towards the
Neelkanth. ‘He too wants vengeance.’
Shiva sat silently, his face expressionless.
Only his eyes glowered with the terrible
anger seething inside.
‘My Lord,’ said Kanakhala looking towards Shiva, her hands folded in a namaste. ‘I
hope that at least you understand what I am trying to say. Even Brahaspati would have
wanted us to avoid violence, if possible.’
The last sentence had an effect on Shiva similar to a torrential downpour on a raging
fire. He turned towards Kanakhala and gazed into her eyes, before turning towards
Daksha. ‘Your Highness, perhaps what Kanakhala says is right. Maybe we can send an
emissary to Swadweep to give them an opportunity to repent. If we can avoid the killing
of innocents, only good will come from it. However, I would still suggest that we begin
war preparations. We should be prepared for the possibility that the Chandravanshis
may reject our offer.’
‘The Mahadev has spoken,’ said Daksha. ‘I propose that this be the decision of the war
council. All in favour, raise your hands.’
Every hand in the room was raised. The die had been cast. There would be an attempt
for peace. If that didn’t work, the Meluhans would attack.

 
‘I have failed again, Bhadra,’ cried Shiva. ‘I can’t protect anyone in need.’
Shiva was sitting next to Veerbhadra, in a private section of his palace courtyard. A
deeply worried Sati had invited Veerbhadra to try and bring Shiva out of his mourning.

 Shiva had retreated into a shell, not speaking, not crying. She hoped her husband’s
childhood friend would succeed where she had failed.
‘How can you blame yourself, Shiva?’ asked Veerbhadra, handing over the chillum to
his friend. ‘How can this be your fault?’
Shiva picked up the chillum and took a deep drag. The marijuana coursed through his
body, but did not help. The pain was too intense. Shiva snorted in disgust and threw the
chillum away. As tears flooded his eyes, he looked up to the sky and swore, ‘I will
avenge you, my brother. If it is the last thing I do. If I have to spend every moment of the
rest of my life. If I have to come back to this world again and again. I will avenge you!’
Veerbhadra turned towards Sati sitting in the distance, a worried look on his face. Sati
got up and walked towards them. She came up to Shiva and held him tight, resting his
tired head against her bosom, hoping to soothe Shiva’s tortured soul. To Sati’s surprise,
Shiva did not raise his arms to wrap them around her. He just sat motionless. Breathing
intermittently.

 
‘My Lord,’ cried a surprised Vraka, as he stood to attention. So did the other twenty-four
brigadiers, with respect to the Neelkanth who had just been announced into the war
room.
Parvateshwar rose slowly. He spoke kindly as he knew the pain Shiva still carried about
Brahaspati’s grisly death. ‘How are you, Shiva?’
‘I am alright, thank you.’
‘We were discussing battle plans.’
‘I know,’ said Shiva. ‘I was wondering if I could join in.’
‘Of course,’ said Parvateshwar, as he moved his chair to the side.
‘The essential problem for us,’ said Parvateshwar, trying to quickly bring Shiva up to
date, ‘is the transport links between Meluha and Swadweep.’
‘There aren’t any, right?’
‘Right,’ answered Parvateshwar. ‘The Chandravanshis followed a “broken earth” policy
after their last defeat at our hands a hundred years back. They destroyed the entire
infrastructure that existed between Meluha and Swadweep. They depopulated their
border cities and moved them deeper into their empire. Forests grew where cities and
roads used to be. There is no river that flows from our territory to theirs. Basically, there
is no way for our huge, technologically superior, war-machines to be transported to the
borders of Swadweep.’
‘That was their aim, obviously,’ said Shiva. ‘Your superiority is technology. Their
superiority is their numbers. They have negated your strength.’
‘Exatly. And if our war-machines are taken out of the equation, our one hundred
thousand strong army may get inundated by their million soldiers.’
‘They have a million strong army?’ asked Shiva, incredulous.
‘Yes, my Lord,’ said Vraka. ‘We can’t be absolutely sure, but that is our estimate.
However, we also estimate that the regulars in that army would not be more than a
hundred thousand. The rest would be part-timers. Essentially, people such as small
traders, artisans, farmers and any other without influence. They would be forcibly
conscripted and used as cannon fodder.’
‘Disgusting,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘Risking the lives of Shudras and Vaishyas for a job
that should be done by Kshatriyas. Their Kshatriyas have no honour.’
Shiva looked towards Parvateshwar
and nodded. ‘Can’t we dismantle our warmachines, carry them to Swadweep and reassemble them?’
‘Yes we can,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘But that is technically possible only for a few. Our
most devastating machines which would give us the edge, like the long-range catapult,

 cannot be assembled outside a factory’
‘The long-range catapult?’
‘Yes,’ answered Parvateshwar. ‘It can hurl huge boulders and smouldering barrels over
distances of over a kilometre. If used effectively, they can soften, even devastate, the
enemy lines before our cavalry and infantry charge. Basically, the role that elephants
used to play earlier.’
‘Then why not use elephants?’
‘They are unpredictable. No matter how long you train them, an army often loses control
over them in the heat of battle. In fact, in the previous war with the Swadweepans,
it
was their own elephants who were their downfall.’
‘Really?’ asked Shiva.
‘Yes,’ answered Parvateshwar.
‘Our ploy of firing at the mahouts and generating
tremendous noise with our war drums worked. The Chandravanshi elephants panicked
and ran into their own army, shattering their lines, especially the ones composed of
irregulars. All we had to do was charge in and finish the job.’
‘No elephants then.’
‘Absolutely,’ said Parvateshwar.
‘So we need something that we can take with us and which can be used to soften their
irregulars in order to negate their numerical superiority.’
Parvateshwar nodded. Shiva looked into the distance, towards the window, where a stiff
morning breeze caused the leaves to flutter. The leaves were green. Shiva stared
harder. They remained green.
‘I know,’ said Shiva, looking at Parvateshwar suddenly, his face luminescent. ‘Why don’t
we use arrows?’
‘Arrows?’ asked a surprised Parvateshwar.
Archery was the battle art of the most elite Kshatriyas, used for one-on-one duels.
However, since one-on-one duels could only be fought between warriors of equal
chosen-tribes, this skill was reduced to only a demonstration art of the crème de la
crème. Archers earned huge respect for their rare skill, but they were not decisive in
battles. There was a time when bows and arrows were crucial in war strategies as
weapons of mass destruction. That was the time of the daivi astras. Many of these
astras were usually released through arrows. However, with the ban on daivi astras
many thousands of years ago by Lord Rudra, the effectiveness of archery units in largescale battles had reduced drastically.
‘How can that reduce their numerical superiority, my Lord?’ asked Vraka. ‘Even the
most skilled of archers will take at least five seconds to aim, fire and execute a kill. He
will not be able to kill more than twelve a minute. We have only one hundred Kshatriyas
who are of the gold order of archers. The rest can shoot, but their aim cannot be relied
upon. So we will not be able to kill more than one thousand two hundred of our enemies
per minute. Certainly not enough against the Chandravanshis.’
‘I am not talking about using arrows for one-on-one shooting,’ said Shiva. ‘I am talking
about using them for softening the enemy, as weapons of mass destruction.’
Disregarding the confused expressions of his audience, Shiva continued, ‘Let me
explain. Suppose we create a corps of archers of the lower Kshatriya chosen-tribes.’
‘But their aim wouldn’t be good,’ said Vraka.
‘That doesn’t matter. Let us say we have at least five thousand of those archers.
Suppose we train them to just get the range right. Forget about the aim. Suppose their
job is to just keep firing arrows in the general direction of the Chandravanshi army. If
they don’t have to aim, they can fire a lot more quickly. Maybe one arrow every two or
three seconds.’
Parvateshwar narrowed his eyes as the brilliance of the idea struck him. The rest of his
brigadiers were still trying to gather their thoughts.

 ‘Think about it,’ said Shiva. ‘We would have five thousand arrows raining down on the
Chandravanshis every two seconds. Suppose we keep this attack on for ten minutes.
An almost continuous shower of arrows. Their irregulars would break. The arrows would
have the same effect like that of the elephants in the last war!’
‘Brilliant!’ cried Vraka.
‘And maybe,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘If the aim doesn’t matter, we could train these archers
to lie on their back, hold the bow on their feet and pull the string back nearly up to their
necks and then release. As long as their feet are pointed in the right direction, it would
work.’
‘Excellent!’ exclaimed Shiva. ‘Because then the bows can be bigger. And the range
longer.’
‘And the arrows bigger and thicker, almost like small spears,’ continued Parvateshwar.
‘Strong enough to even penetrate leather and thick wood shields. Only the soldiers with
metal shields, like the regulars, would be safe from this.’
‘Do we have our answer?’ asked Shiva.
‘Yes, we do,’ answered Parvateshwar with a smile. He turned towards Vraka. ‘Create
this corps. I want five thousand men ready within two weeks.’
‘It will be done, my Lord,’ said Vraka.

 
‘What do you want to talk about, Shiva?’ asked Parvateshwar,
as he entered the
metallurgy factory. He was accompanied by Vraka and Prasanjit, as per Shiva’s
request. Vraka had reluctanly left the archery corps he had been training over the past
week. However, he had been motivated to attend with the expectation of another
brilliant idea from the Neelkanth. He was not disappointed.
‘I was thinking,’ said Shiva, ‘we would still need an equivalent of your stabbing ram to
break their centre. The centre is where I assume their general would place their
regulars. As long as they hold, our victory cannot be guaranteed.’
‘Right,’ said Parvateshwar.
‘And we have to assume that these soldiers would be
disciplined enough to stay in formation despite the barrage of arrows.’
‘Exactly,’ said Shiva. ‘We can’t transport the ram, right?’
‘No we can’t, my Lord’ said Vraka.
‘How about if we try to create a human ram?’
‘Go ahead,’ said Parvateshwar slowly, listening intendly.
‘Say we align the soldiers into a square of twenty men by twenty men,’ said Shiva. ‘Say
we have each one use his shield to cover the left half of his own body and the right half
of the soldier to the left of him.’
‘That will allow them to push their spear through between the shields,’ said
Parvateshwar.
‘Exactly,’ said Shiva. ‘And the soldiers behind use their shields as a lid to cover
themselves and the soldier in front. This formation would be like a tortoise. With the
shields holding against any attack, much like a tortoise’s shell, the enemy will not be
able to break through, but our spears will cut into them.’
‘And we could have the strongest and most experienced soldiers at the front to make
sure the tortoise is well led,’ said Prasanjit.
‘No,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘Have the most experienced at the back and the sides. To
make sure that the square doesn’t break in case the younger soldiers panic. This entire
formation works only if the team stays together.’
‘Right,’ said Shiva, smiling at Parvateshwar’s quick insight. ‘And what if, instead of the
usual spears, they carried this?’
Shiva raised a weapon that he had designed and the army metallurgy team had quickly

 assembled. Parvateshwar marvelled at the simple brilliance of it. It had the body of a
spear. But its head had been broadened. On to the broadened head, two more spikes
had been added, to the left and right of the main spear spike. Assaulting an enemy with
this weapon would be like striking him with three spears at the same time.
‘Absolutely brilliant Shiva,’ marvelled Parvateshwar. ‘What do you call it?’ ‘I call it a
trishui.’
‘Prasanjit,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘You site in charge of creating this corps. I want at least
five tortoise formations ready by the time we march. I will assign two thousand men to
you for this.’
‘It will be done, my Lord,’ said Prasanjit with a military salute.
Parvateshwar gazed at Shiva with respect. He thought Shiva’s ideas were brilliant. And
the fact that he had come up with these tactics despite his profound personal grief was
worthy of admiration. Maybe what the others say about Shiva could be true. Maybe he
is the man who will finish Lord Ram’s task. Parvateshwar hoped that Shiva would not
prove him wrong.

 
Shiva sat in the royal meeting room, with Daksha and Parvateshwar at his side. Two
legendary Arishtanemi brigadiers, Vidyunmali and Mayashrenik, sat a distance away. A
muscular and once proud man stood in front of Shiva, his hands together, pleading.
‘Give me a chance, my Lord,’ said Drapaku. ‘If the law has been changed, then why
can’t we fight?’
Drapaku was the man whose blind father had blessed Shiva in Kotdwaar. He had been
a brigadier in the Meluhan army before the disease which blinded his father also killed
his wife and unborn child. He had been declared a vikarma along with his father.
‘First, how is your father?’ asked Shiva. ‘He is well, my Lord. And he will disown me if I
don’t support you in this dharmayudh.’
Shiva smiled softly. He too believed this was a dharmayudh,
a holy war. ‘But Drapaku,
who will take care of him if something were to happen to you?’
‘Meluha will take care of him, my Lord. But he would die a thousand deaths if I didn’t go
to batde with you. What kind of a son would I be if I didn’t fight for my father’s honour?
For my country’s honour?’
Shiva still seemed a litde unsure. He could sense the discomfort of the others in the
room with this conversation. It had not escaped his notice that despite the repeal of the
vikarma law, nobody had touched Drapaku when he had entered.
‘My Lord, we are outnumbered heavily by the Chandravanshis,’ continued Drapaku. ‘We
need every trained warrior we have. There are at least five thousand soldiers who can’t
battle since they had been declared vikarma. I can bring them together. We are willing,
and eager, to die for our country’
‘I don’t want you to die for Meluha, brave Drapaku,’ said Shiva. Drapaku’s face fell
instantly. He thought he would be returning home to Kotdwaar. ‘However,’ continued
Shiva. ‘I would like it if you killed for Meluha.’
Drapaku looked up.
‘Raise your brigade, Drapaku,’ ordered Shiva. Turning towards Daksha, he continued,
‘We will call it the Vikarma Brigade.’

 
‘How can we have vikarmas in our army? This is ridiculous!’ glared Vidyunmali.
Vidyunmali and Mayashrenik were in their private gym, preparing for their regular sword

 training.
‘Vidyu...,’ cajoled Mayashrenik.
‘Don’t“Vidyu” me, Maya. You know this is wrong.’
The usually calm Mayashrenik just nodded and let his impetuous friend vent his
frustration.
‘How will I face my ancestors if I die in this battle?’ asked Vidyunmali. ‘What will I
answer if they ask me how I let a non-Kshatriya fight a battle that only we Kshatriyas
should have fought? It is our duty to protect the weak. We are not supposed to use the
weak to fight for us.’
‘Vidyu, I don’t think Drapaku is weak. Have you forgotten his valour in the previous
Chandravanshi war?’
‘He is a vikarma! That makes him weak!’
‘Lord Shiva has ordered that there are no vikarmas anymore.’
‘I don’t think the Neelkanfh truly knows right from wrong!’
‘VIDYU!’ shouted Mayashrenik.
Vidyunmali was surprised by the outburst.
‘If the Neelkanth says it is right,’ continued Mayashrenik, ‘then itis right!’

  
CHAPTER 22
Empire of Evil
 
‘This is the military formation I think ideal for the battle,’ said Parvateshwar.
Vraka and Parvateshwar were sitting in the general’s private office. The formation was
that of a bow. The soldiers would be arranged in a wide semi-circular pattern. The
slower corps, like the tortoises, would be placed at the centre. The flanks would
comprise quicker units such as the light infantry. The cavalry would be at both the ends
of the bow, ready to be quickly deployed anywhere on the front or to ride along the
sides of the bow for protection. The bow formation was ideal for a smaller army. It
provided flexibility without sacrificing strength.
‘It is ideal, my Lord,’ said Vraka. ‘What does the Mahadev have to say?’
‘Shiva thinks it suits our requirements perfectly’
Vraka did not like it when Parvateshwar referred to the Neelkanth by his name. But who
was he to correct his general? ‘I agree, my Lord.’
‘I will lead the left flank,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘And you will lead the right. That is why I
need your opinion on some things.’
‘Me, my Lord?’ asked an astonished Vraka. ‘I thought the Mahadev would lead the other
flank.’
‘Shiva? No, I don’t think he would be fighting this war, Vraka.’
Vraka looked up in surprise. But he remained silent.
Parvateshwar probably felt the need to explain, for he continued speaking. ‘He is a good
and capable man, no doubt. But the uppermost desire in his mind is retribution, not
justice for Meluha. We will help him wreak vengeance when we throw the guilty Naga at
his feet. He won’t be putting his own life at risk in a war just to find one Naga.’
Vraka kept his eyes low, lest they betray the fact that he disagreed with his chief.
‘To be fair,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘We can’t impose on him just because he has a blue
throat. I respect him a lot. But I don’t expect him to fight. What reason would there be for
him to do that?’
Vraka looked up for a brief instant at Parvateshwar’s
eyes. Why was his general
refusing to accept what was so obvious to everyone? Was he so attached to Lord Ram
that he couldn’t believe that another saviour had arrived on earth? Did he actually
believe that Lord Ram could be the only one? Hadn’t Lord Ram himself said that he is
replaceable, only dharma is irreplaceable?
‘Furthermore,’ continued Parvateshwar, ‘he is married now. He is obviously in love. He
is not going to risk Sati being bereaved again. Why should he? It’s unfair of us to
demand this of him.’
‘Vraka thought, not daring to voice his opinion. The Mahadev
will fight for all of us,
General. He will battle to protect us. Why? Because
that is what Mahadevs
do.’
Vraka was not aware that Parvateshwar was hoping something similar in his mind. He
too wished that Shiva would rise to be a Mahadev and lead them to victory against the
Chandravanshis. However, Parvateshwar had learned through long years of experience
that while many men tried to rise up to Lord Ram’s level, none had ever succeeded.
Parvateshwar had laid hopes on a few such men in his youth. And he had always been
disillusioned at the end. He was simply preparing himself for another such expected
disappointment from Shiva. He didn’t plan to be left without a backup if Shiva refused to
fight the battle against the Chandravanshis.

  
The war council sat silently as Daksha read the letter that had come back from
Swadweep — from the court of Emperor Dilipa. Daksha’s reaction upon reading the
letter left no doubt as to the message it contained. He shut his eyes, his face contorted
in rage, his fist clenched tight. He handed the letter over to Kanakhala and sneered,
‘Read it. Read it out loud so that the whole world may be sickened by the repugnance of
the Chandravanshis.’
Kanakhala frowned slightly before taking the letter and reading it out loud. ‘Emperor
Daksha, Suryavanshi liege, protector of Meluha. Please accept my deep condolences
for the dastardly attack on Mount Mandar. Such a senseless
assault on peaceful
Brahmins cannot but be condemned in the strongest of terms. We are shocked that any
denizen of India would stoop to such levels. It is, therefore, with surprise and sadness
that I read your letter. I assure you that neither me nor anyone in my command has
anything to do with this devious attack. Hence I have to inform you, with regret, that
there is nobody I can hand over to you. I hope that you understand the sincerity of this
letter and will not make a hasty decision, which may have regrettable consequences for
you. I assure you of my empire’s full support in the investigation of this outrage. Please
do inform us of how we can be of assistance to you in bringing the criminals to justice.’
Kanakhala took a deep breath to compose herself. The anger over the typically
Chandravanshi doubletalk was washing right through her, making her regret her earlier
stand.
‘It’s personally signed by the Emperor Dilipa,’ said Kanakhala, completing her reading of
the letter.
‘NotEmperor Dilipa,’ growled a fuming Daksha. ‘Terrorist Dilipa of the Empire of Evil!’
‘War!’ arose a cry from the council, unanimous in its rage.
Daksha looked over at a scowling Shiva who nodded imperceptibly.
‘War it is!’ bellowed Daksha. ‘We march in two weeks!’

 
The bracelet seemed to develop a life of its own. It had swelled to enormous
proportions, dwarfing Shiva. Its edges were engulfed in gigantic flames. The three
colossal serpents, which formed the Aum, separated from each other and slithered
towards Shiva. The one in the centre, while nodding to the snake on its left, hissed, ‘He
got your brother. And the other one will soon get your wife.’
The serpents to the left and right scowled eerily.
Shiva pointed his finger menacingly at the serpent in the centre. ‘You dare touch even a
hair on her and I will rip your soul out of...’
‘But I...’ continued the serpent, not even acknowledging Shiva’s threat. ‘I’m saving
myself. I’m saving myself for you.’
Shiva stared at the serpent with impotent rage.
‘I will get you,’ said the serpent as its mouth opened wide, ready to swallow him whole.
Shiva’s eyes suddenly opened wide. He was sweating hard. He looked around, but
couldn’t see a thing. It was extraordinarily dark. He reached out for Sati, to check if she
was safe. She wasn’t there. He was up in a flash, feeling a chill in his heart, almost
expecting that the serpents had escaped his dreams and transformed into reality.
‘Shiva,’ said Sati, looking at him.
She was sitting at the edge of the bed. The tiny military tent they slept in could not
afford the luxury of chairs. This tent had been their travelling home for the last one

 month as the Meluhan army marched towards Swadweep.
‘What is it, Sati?’ asked Shiva, his eyes adjusting to the dim light. He slipped the
offending bracelet that he held tightly in his hands, back into his pouch.
When had I taken it out?
‘Shiva,’ continued Sati. She had tried to talk about this for the last two weeks. Ever
since she had been sure of the news, but had never found an opportune moment. She
always managed to convince herself that this was minor news and it would not be right
for her to trouble her husband with this, especially when he was going through one of
the worst phases of his life. But it was too late now. He had to learn from her and not
somebody else. News like this did not remain secret in an army camp for long. ‘I have
something to tell you.’
‘Yes,’ said Shiva, though his dream still rankled. ‘What is it?’
‘I don’t think I will be able to fight in the war.’
‘What? Why?’ asked a startled Shiva. He knew that cowardice was a word that did not
exist in Sati’s dictionary. Then why was she telling him so? And why now, when the
army had already marched for nearly a month through the dense forests that separated
Meluha from Swadweep? They were already in enemy territory. There was no turning
back. ‘Sati, this is not like you.’
‘Umm, Shiva,’ said an embarrassed Sati. Such discussions were always difficult for the
somewhat prudish Suryavanshis. ‘I have my reasons.’
‘Reasons?’ asked Shiva. ‘What...’
Suddenly the reason smacked Shiva like a silent thunderbolt.
‘My god! Are you sure?’
‘Yes,’ said Sati, bashfully.
‘By the Holy Lake! I am going to be a father?’
Seeing the ecstasy on Shiva’s face, Sati felt a pang of guilt that she hadn’t told him
before.
‘Wow!’ whooped a thrilled Shiva as he swirled her in his arms. ‘This is the best news I
have heard in a long time!’
Sati smiled warmly and rested her head on his tired but strong shoulders.
‘We will name our daughter after the one who has comforted you through the last two
months, when I have been of no help,’ said Shiva. ‘We will name her Krittika!’
Sati looked up in surprise. She didn’t believe that it was possible to love him even more.
But it was. She smiled. ‘It could be a son, you know’
‘Nah,’ grinned Shiva. ‘It will be a daughter. And I’ll spoil her to high heavens!’
Sati laughed heartily. Shiva joined in. His first spirited laugh in over two months. He
embraced Sati, feeling the negative energy dissipate from his being. ‘I love you, Sati.’
‘I love you too,’ she whispered.

 
Shiva raised the curtain to come out of the tent that Sati was ensconced in. Krittika and
Ayurvati were with her. A retinue of nurses attended to her every need. Shiva had been
obsessive about the health of his unborn child, questioning Ayurvati incessantly about
every aspect of Sati’s well-being for the last two months of the march to Swadweep.
The Suryavanshis
had moved valiantly for nearly three months. The path had been
much more challenging than expected. The forest had reclaimed its original habitat with
alarming ferocity. The army was invaded by wild animals and disease at every turn.
They had lost two thousand men. And not one to the enemy. After weeks of hacking
and marching, the scouts had finally managed to lead the Suryavanshi army to the
Chandravanshis.
The Chandravanshis
were camped on a sweeping plain called Dharmakhet. Their

 choice was clever. A substantial and uncluttered field, it had enough room to allow the
Chandravanshis
to manoeuvre their million strong army. The full weight of their
numerical superiority would come into play. The Suryavanshi army had tried to wait out
the Chandravanshis,
to test if they would lose patience and attack in a less
advantageous area. But the Chandravanshis had held firm. Finally, the Suryavanshis
moved camp to an easily defensible valley close to Dharmakhet.
Shiva looked up at the clear sky. A lone eagle flew overhead, circling the royal camp,
while five pigeons flew lower, unafraid of the eagle. A strange sign. His Guna shaman
would have probably said that it’s a bad time for batde, for the pigeons clearly have a
hidden advantage.
Don’t think about it. It is all nonsense in any case.
Breathing in the fresh morning air deeply, he turned right, towards Emperor Daksha’s
tent. Nandi was walking towards him.
‘What is it Nandi?’
‘I was just coming towards your tent, my Lord. The Emperor requests your presence.
There’s been a troubling development’
Shiva and Nandi hurried towards Daksha’s tastefully appointed royal tent. They entered
to find Daksha and Parvateshwar engrossed in a discussion. Vraka, Mayashrenik and
Drapaku sat at a distance. Drapaku was a little further away from the rest.
‘This is a disaster,’ groaned Daksha.
‘Your Highness?’ asked Shiva.
‘My Lord! I’m glad you’re here. We face complete disaster.’
‘Let’s not use words like that, your Highness,’ said Shiva. Turning towards
Parvateshwar, he asked, ‘So your suspicions were correct?’
‘Yes,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘The scouts just returned a few minutes ago. There was a
reason the Chandravanshis
were refusing to mobilise. They have despatched
a
hundred thousand soldiers in a great arc around our position. They will enter our valley
by tomorrow morning. We will be sandwiched between their main force ahead of us and
another hundred thousand at the back.’
‘We can’t fight on two fronts, my Lord,’ cried Daksha.
‘What do we do?’
‘Was it Veerbhadra’s scouts who returned with the news?’ asked Shiva.
Parvateshwar
nodded. Shiva turned towards Nandi, who rushed out immediately.
Moments later, Veerbhadra stood before them.
‘What route is the Chandravanshi detachment taking, Bhadra?’ asked Shiva.
‘Up the east, along the steep mountains on our side. I think they intend to enter our
valley some fifty kilometres up north.’
‘Did you take a cartographer with you as Parvateshwar had instructed?’
Veerbhadra nodded, moved to the centre table and laid out the map on it. Shiva and
Parvateshwar leaned across. Pointing to the route with his fingers, Veerbhadra said,
‘This way’.
Shiva suddenly started as he noticed the ideal defensive position on the map, deep
north of the Suryavanshi camp. He looked up at Parvateshwar. The same thought had
occurred to the General.
‘How many men do you think, Parvateshwar?’
‘Difficult to say. It will be tough. But the pass looks defendable. It will need a sizeable
contingent though. At least thirty thousand.’
‘But we can’t spare too many men. I am sure the battle with the main Chandravanshi
army to the south will also happen tomorrow. It would be the best time for them to take
up positions.’
Parvateshwar nodded grimly. The Meluhans might just have to retreat and manoeuvre
for a batde on another, more advantageous position, he thought unhappily.

 ‘I think five thousand men ought to do it, my Lords.’
Shiva and Parvateshwar had not noticed Drapaku move to the table. He was examining
the pass that Shiva had just pointed out.
‘Look here,’ continued Drapaku, as Shiva and Parvateshwar peered.
‘The mountains ahead constrict rapidly to this pass, which is not more than fifty metres
across. It doesn’t matter how big their army is, each charge by the enemy into the pass
cannot comprise of more than a few hundred men.’
‘But Drapaku, with a hundred thousand men, they can launch one charge after another,
almost continuously,’ said Mayashrenik. ‘And with the mountains so steep on the sides,
you can’t use any of our missiles. Victory is almost impossible.’
‘It’s not about victory,’ said Drapaku. ‘It’s about holding them for a day so that our main
army can fight.’
‘I will do it,’ said Parvateshwar.
‘No, my Lord,’ said Vraka. ‘You are required for the main charge.’ Shiva looked up at
Parvateshwar.
I need to be here as well.
‘I can’t do it either,’ said Shiva, shaking his head.
Parvateshwar looked up at Shiva, disillusionment writ large on his face. While he had
prepared his heart for disappointment, he had hoped that Shiva would prove him wrong.
But it appeared clear to Parvateshwar that Shiva too would be simply watching the
battìe from the viewing platform being made for Daksha.
‘Give me the honour, my Lord,’ said Drapaku.
‘Drapaku...,’ whispered Mayashrenik, not putting in words what everyone else knew.
With only five thousand soldiers, the battle at the northern pass against the
Chandravanshi detachment was a suicide mission.
‘Drapaku,’ said Shiva. ‘I don’t know if...’
‘I know, my Lord,’ interrupted Drapaku. ‘It is my destiny. I will hold them for one day. If
Lord Indra supports me, I’ll even try for two. Get us victory by then.’
Daksha suddenly interjected. ‘Wonderful. Drapaku, make preparations
to leave
immediately’
Drapaku saluted smartly and rushed out before any second thoughts were voiced.

 
It took less than an hour before the vikarma brigade was marching out of the camp. The
sun was high up in the sky and practically the entire camp was awake, watching the
soldiers set out on their mission. Everyone knew the terrible odds the vikarmas were
going to face. They knew that it was unlikely that any of these soldiers would be seen
alive again. The soldiers, though, did not exhibit the slightest hesitation or hint of fear,
as they walked on. The camp stood in silent awe. One thought reverberated through all
of them.
How could the vikarmas be so magnificent? They are supposed to be weak.
Drapaku was at the lead, his handsome face smeared with war paint. On top of his
armour, he wore a saffron angvastram. The colour of the Parmatma. The colour worn
for the final journey. He didn’t expect to return.
He stopped suddenly as Vidyunmali darted in front of him. Drapaku frowned. Before he
could react, Vidyunmali had drawn his knife. Drapaku reached for his side arm. But
Vidyunmali was quicker. He sliced his own thumb across the blade, and brought it up to
Drapaku’s forehead. In the tradition of the great brother-warriors of yore, Vidyunmali ran
his blood across Drapaku’s brow, signifying that his blood will protect him.
‘You’re a better man than me, Drapaku,’ whispered Vidyunmali.
Drapaku stood silent, astonished by Vidyunmali’s uncharacteristic behaviour.

 Raising his balled fist high, Vidyunmali roared, ‘Give them hell, vikarma!’
‘Give them hell, vikarma!’ bellowed the Suryavanshis, repeating it again and again.
Drapaku and his soldiers looked around the camp, absorbing the respect that they had
been denied so long. Way too long.
‘Give them hell, vikarma!’
Drapaku nodded, turned and marched on before his emotions spoiled the moment. His
soldiers followed.
‘Give them hell, vikarma!’

 
It was an uncharacteristically warm morning for that time of the year.
The Chandravanshi detachment had been surprised to find Meluhan soldiers at the
northern pass the previous night. They had immediately attacked. The vikarmas had
held them through the night, buying precious time for the main Suryavanshi army.
This had to be the day for the main battle. Shiva was prepared.
Sati stood resplendent, looping the aarti thali in small circles around Shiva’s face. She
stopped after seven turns, took some vermilion on her thumb and smeared it up Shiva’s
forehead in a long tilak. ‘Come back victorious or don’t come back at all.’
Shiva raised one eyebrow and grimaced. ‘What kind of a send off is that?!’
‘What? No, it’s just...’ stammered Sati.
‘I know, I know,’ smiled Shiva as he embraced Sati. ‘It’s the traditional Suryavanshi
send off before a war, right?’
Sati looked up, her eyes moist. Her love for Shiva was overcoming decades of
Suryavanshi training. ‘Just come back safe and sound.’
‘I will, my love,’ whispered Shiva. ‘You won’t get rid of me that easily.’
Sati smiled weakly. ‘I’ll be waiting.’
Sati stood on her toes and kissed Shiva lightly. Shiva kissed her back and turned
quickly, before his heart would overcome his head with second thoughts. Lifting the tent
curtain, he walked out. He looked up at the skies, in case there were some other
omens. There were none.
Bloody good!
The distant droning of Sanskrit shlokas, accompanied by the beating of war drums in a
smooth rhythmic pulse, wafted in over the dry winter breeze. Shiva had thought this
particular Suryavanshi custom odd. But maybe there was something to the Brahmin
‘Call for Indra and Agni’, as this particular puja was called. The drums and the shlokas
somehow grafted together to rouse a fierce warrior spirit in whoever heard them. The
beats would quicken as the battle began. Shiva was eager to throw himself into the
battle. He turned and strode towards Daksha’s tent.
‘Greetings, your Highness,’ said Shiva as he raised the curtain to enter the royal tent,
where Parvateshwar
was explaining
the plans to the Emperor. ‘Namaste,
Parvateshwar.’
Parvateshwar smiled and folded his hands.
‘What news of Drapaku, Parvateshwar?’
asked Shiva. The last despatch I heard is at
least three hours old.’
‘The vikarma battle is on. Drapaku still leads them. He has bought us invaluable time.
May Lord Ram bless him.’
‘Yes,’ agreed Shiva. ‘May Lord Ram bless him. He just has to hold on to the end of this
day.’
‘My Lord,’ said Daksha, hands in a formal namaste, head bowed. ‘It is an auspicious
beginning. We will have a good day. Wouldn’t you agree?’
‘Yes it does seem so,’ smiled Shiva. The news of Drapaku is very welcome. ‘But

 perhaps this question may be better suited for the fourth prahar, your Highness.’
‘I am sure the answer would be the same, my Lord. By the fourth prahar today, Emperor
Dilipa will be standing in front of us, in chains, waiting for justice to be done.’
‘Careful, your Highness,’ said Shiva with a smile. ‘Let us not tempt fate. We still have to
win the war!’
‘We will face no problems. We have the Neelkanfh with us. We just need to attack.
Victory is guaranteed.’
‘I think a litde bit more than a blue throat will be required to beat the Chandravanshis,
your Highness,’ said Shiva, his smile even broader. ‘We shouldn’t underestimate our
enemy.’
‘I don’t underestimate them, my Lord. But I will not make the mistake of underestimating
you either.’
Shiva gave up. He had learned some time back that it was impossible to win a debate
against Daksha’s unquestioning conviction.
‘Perhaps I should leave, your Highness,’ said Parvateshwar. The time has come. With
your permission.’
‘Of course, Parvateshwar. Vijayibhavl ,’ said Daksha. Turning towards Shiva, Daksha
continued, ‘My Lord, they have built a viewing platform for us on the hill at the back.’
‘Viewing platform?’ asked Shiva, perplexed.
‘Yes. Why don’t we watch the battle from there? You would also be in a better position
to direct the battle from there.’
Shiva narrowed his eyes in surprise. ‘Your Highness, my position is with the soldiers.
On the battlefield.’
Parvateshwar
stopped in his tracks. Startled and delighted at having been proved
wrong.
‘My Lord, this is a job for butchers, not the Neelkanfh,’ said a concerned Daksha. ‘You
don’t need to sully your hands with Chandravanshi blood. Parvateshwar will arrest that
Naga and throw him at your feet. You can extract such a terrible retribution from him
that his entire tribe would dread your justice for aeons.’
‘This is not about my revenge, your Highness. It is about the vengeance of Meluha. It
would be petty of me to think that an entire war is being fought just for me. This is a war
between good and evil. A batde in which one has to choose a side. And fight. There are
no bystanders in a dharmayudh
— it is a holy war.’
Parvateshwar watched Shiva intently, his eyes blazing with admiration. These were
Lord Ram’s words. There are no bystanders
in a dharmayudh.
‘My Lord, we can’t afford to risk your life,’ pleaded Daksha. You are too important. I am
sure that we can win this war without taking that gamble. Your presence has inspired
us. There are many who are willing to shed their blood for you.’
‘If they are willing to shed their blood for me, then I must be willing to shed my blood for
them.’
Parvateshwar’s heart was swamped by the greatest joy an accomplished Suryavanshi
could feel. The joy of finally finding a man worth following. The joy of finding a man
worth being inspired by. The joy of finding a man, deserving of being spoken of in the
same breath, as Lord Ram himself.
A worried Daksha came closer to Shiva. He realised that if he had to stop the Neelkanth
from this foolhardiness, he would have to speak his mind. He whispered softly, ‘My
Lord, you are my daughter’s husband. If something happened to you, she would be
bereaved twice in one life. I can’t let that happen to her.’
‘Nothing will happen,’ whispered Shiva. ‘And Sati would die a thousand deaths if she
saw her husband stay away from a dharmayudh.
She would lose respect for me. If she
weren’t pregnant, she would have been fighting alongside me, shoulder to shoulder.
You know that.’

 Daksha stared at Shiva, broken, troubled and apprehensive.
Shiva smiled warmly. ‘Nothing will happen, your Highness.’
‘And what if it does?’
‘Then it should be remembered that it happened for a good cause. Sati would be proud
of me.’
Daksha continued to stare at Shiva, his face a portrait of agonised distress.
‘Forgive me, your Highness, but I must go,’ said Shiva with a formal namaste, turning to
leave.
Parvateshwar followed distracted, as if commanded by a higher force. As Shiva walked
briskly out of the tent towards his horse, he heard Parvateshwar’s booming voice. ‘My
Lord!’
Shiva continued walking.
‘My Lord,’ bellowed Parvateshwar again, more insistent.
Shiva stopped abruptly. He turned, a surprised frown on his face. ‘I am sorry
Parvateshwar. I thought you were calling out to his Highness.’
‘No, my Lord,’ said Parvateshwar, reaching up to Shiva. ‘It was you I called.’
His frown deeper, Shiva asked, ‘What is the matter, brave General?’
Parvateshwar came to a halt in rigid military attention. He kept a polite distance from
Shiva. He could not stand on the hallowed ground that cradled the Mahadev. As if in a
daze, Parvateshwar slowly curled his fist and brought it up to his chest. And then,
completing the formal Meluhan salute, he bowed low. Lower than he had ever bowed
before a living man. As low as he bowed before Lord Ram’s idol during his regular
morning pujas. Shiva continued to stare at Parvateshwar, his face an odd mixture of
surprise and embarrassment.
Shiva respected
Parvateshwar
too much to be
comfortable with such open idolisation from him.
Rising, but with his head still bent, Parvateshwar whispered, ‘I will be honoured to shed
my blood with you, my Lord.’ Raising his head, he repeated, ‘Honoured.’
Shiva smiled and touched Parvateshwar’s arm. ‘Well, if our plans are good my friend,
hopefully we won’t have to shed too much of it!’

  
CHAPTER 23
Dharmayudh, the Holy War
 
The Suryavanshis were arranged like a bow. Strong, yet flexible. The recently raised
tortoise regiments had been placed at the centre. The light infantry formed the flanks,
while the cavalry, in turn, bordered them. The chariots had been abandoned due to the
unseasonal rain the previous night. They couldn’t risk the wheels getting stuck in the
slush. The newly reared archer regiments remained stationed at the back. Skilfully
designed back rests had been fabricated for them, which allowed the archers to lie and
guide their feet with an ingenious system of gears. The bows could be stretched across
their feet and the strings drawn back up to their chins, releasing powerfully built arrows,
almost the size of small spears. As they were at the back of the Suryavanshi infantry,
their presence was hidden from the Chandravanshis.
The Chandravanshis had placed their army as per their strength in a standard offensive
formation. Their massive infantry was in squads of five thousand. There were fifty such,
comprising a full legion in a straight line. They stretched as far as the eye could see.
There were three more such legions behind the first one, ready to finish off the job. This
formation allowed a direct assault onto a numerically inferior enemy, giving the offence
tremendous strength and solidity, but also making it rigid. The squads left spaces in
between them, to allow the cavalry to charge through if required. Seeing the
Suryavanshi formation, the Chandravanshi cavalry from the rear had been moved to the
flanks. This would enable a quicker charge at the flanks of the Suryavanshi formation
and disrupt enemy lines. The Chandravanshi general clearly had a copy of the ancient
war manuals and was playing it religiously, page by page. It would have been a perfect
move against an enemy who also followed standard tactics. Unfortunately, he was up
against a Tibetan tribal chief whose innovations had transformed the Suryavanshi
attack.
As Shiva rode towards the hillock at the edge of the main battlefield, the Brahmins
picked up the tempo of their shlokas while the war drums pumped the energy to a
higher level. Despite being outnumbered on a vast scale, the Suryavanshis
did not
exhibit even the slightest hint of nervousness. They had buried their fear deep.
The war cries of the clan-gods of the various brigades rent the air.
‘Indra dev Id jail’
‘Agni dev ki jail’
‘Jai Shakti devi Id!’
‘Varun dev ki jai!’
‘Jai Pawan dev Id!’
But these cries were forgotten in an instant as the soldiers saw a magnificent white
steed canter in over the hillock carrying a handsome, muscular figure. A thunderous
roar pierced the sky, loud enough to force the gods out of their cloud palaces to peer at
the events unfolding below. The Neelkanth raised his hand in acknowledgment.
Following him was General Parvateshwar, accompanied by Nandi and Veerbhadra.
Vraka was off his horse in a flash as Shiva approached him. Parvateshwar dismounted
equally rapidly and was next to Vraka before Shiva could reach him.
‘The Lord will lead the right flank, Brigadier,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘I hope that is alright’
‘It will be my honour to fight under his command, my Lord,’ said a beaming Vraka. He
immediately pulled out his Field Commander baton from the grip on his side, went down

 on one knee and raised his hand high, to handover the charge to Shiva.
‘You people have to stop doing this,’ said Shiva laughing. ‘You embarrass me!’
Pulling Vraka up on his feet, Shiva embraced him tightly. ‘I am your friend, not your
Lord.’
A stardled Vraka stepped back, his soul unable to handle the gush of positive energy
flowing in. He mumbled, ‘Yes, my Lord.’
Shaking his head softly, Shiva smiled. He gently took the baton from Vraka’s extended
hand and raised it high, for the entire Suryavanshi army to see. An ear-splitting cry
ripped through the ranks.
‘Mahadev! Mahadev! Mahadev!’
Shiva vaulted onto his horse in one smooth arc. Holding the baton high, he rode up and
down the line. The Suryavanshi roar got louder and louder.
‘Mahadev!’
‘Mahadev!’
‘Mahadev!’
‘Suryavanshis!’ bellowed Shiva, raising his hand. ‘Meluhans! Hear me!’
The army quietened down to hear their living god.
‘Who is a Mahadev?’ roared Shiva.
They listened in rapt attention, hanging on his every word.
‘Does he sit on a sad height and look on idly while ordinary men do what should be his
job? No!’
Some soldiers were praying inaudibly.
‘Does he just lazily bestow his blessings while others fight for the good? Does he stand
by nonchalantly and count the dead while the living sacrifice themselves to destroy evil?
No!’
There was pin-drop silence as the Suryavanshis absorbed their Neelkanth’s message.
‘A man becomes
a Mahadev only when he fights for good. A Mahadev is not born from
his mother’s womb. He is forged in the heat of battle, when he wages a war to destroy
evil!’
The army stood hushed, feeling a flood of positive energy.
‘I am a Mahadev!’ bellowed Shiva.
A resounding roar arose from the Suryavanshis.
They were led by the Mahadev.
The God of Gods. The Chandravanshis did not stand a chance.
‘But I am not the only one!’
A shocked silence descended on the Suryavanshis. What did the Mahadev mean? He
is not the only one? Do the Chandravanshis have a god too?
‘I am not the only one! For I see a hundred thousand Mahadevs in front of me! I see a
hundred thousand men willing to fight on the side of good! I see a hundred thousand
men willing to battle evil! I see a hundred thousand men capable of destroying evil!’
The stunned Suryavanshis
gaped at their Neelkanth as the import of his words
permeated their minds. They dared not ask the question: Are we gods?
Shiva had the answer: ‘Har Ek Hal Mahadev!’
The Meluhans stood astounded. Every single one a Mahadev?
‘Har Har Mahadev? ’ bellowed Shiva.
The Meluhans roared. All of us are Mahadevs!
Pure primal energy coursed through the veins of each Suryavanshi. They were gods! It
didn’t matter that the Chandravanshis outnumbered them ten to one. They were gods!
Even if the evil Chandravanshis
outnumbered them a hundred to one, victory was
assured. They were gods!
‘Har Har Mahadev!’ cried the Suryavanshi army.
‘Har Har Mahadev!’ yelled Shiva. ‘All of us are gods! Gods on a mission!’
Drawing his sword, he pulled the reins of his horse. Rising on its hind legs with a

 ferocious neigh, the horse pirouetted smartly to face the Chandravanshis. Shiva pointed
his sword at his enemies. ‘On a mission to destroy evil!’
The Suryavanshis bellowed after their Lord. Har Har Mahadev!
The cry rent the air. Har Har Mahadev!
Victory would not be denied. Har Har Mahadev!
The long spell of evil would end today. Har Har Mahadev!
As the army roared like the gods that they were, Shiva rode on towards a beaming
Parvateshwar who was flanked by Nandi, Veerbhadra and Vraka.
‘Nice speech,’ grinned Veerbhadra.
Shiva winked at him. He then turned his horse towards Parvateshwar. ‘General, I think
it’s time we start our own rainfall.’
‘Yes, my Lord,’ nodded Parvateshwar. Turning his horse around, he gave the orders to
his flag bearer. ‘The archers.’
The flag bearer raised the coded flag. It was red with a vicious black lightening darned
on it. The message was repeated by flag bearers across the lines. The Suryavanshi
infantry immediately hunched down on its knees. Shiva, Parvateshwar, Vraka, Nandi
and Veerbhadra dismounted rapidly, pulling their horses down to their knees. And the
arrows flew in a deadly shower.
The archers had been placed in a semi-circular formation, to cover as wide a range of
the Chandravanshi
army as possible. Five thousand archers rained death on the
Chandravanshis
as the sky turned black with a curtain of arrows. The hapless
Swadweepans
were easy prey in their tight formations. The arrows, nearly as powerful
as short spears, easily penetrated the leather and wood shields of the irregular
Chandravanshi soldiers. Only the regulars held metal shields. It had been just a few
minutes of the ruthless massacre with arrows raining down onto the squads of the first
legion that the Chandravanshi lines started breaking. The first legion was taking too
many casualties to hold on to their position. The irregulars started running back, causing
chaos. Confusion reigned in the legions behind.
Parvateshwar turned towards Shiva. ‘I think we should lengthen the range, my Lord.’
Shiva nodded in reply. Parvateshwar
nodded to his flag bearer who relayed the
message. The archers stopped shooting for just a few moments. Turning their wheels
right, they rapidly raised the height of their foot rests. With the longer range quickly set,
they drew their arrows. And let fly. The arrows hit the second legion of the
Chandravanshis now. The pincer attack of the retreating first Chandravanshi legion and
the concurrent hail of arrows created bedlam in the second legion.
Shiva noticed the Chandravanshi cavalry moving into position to attack. He turned to
Parvateshwar. ‘General, their cavalry is moving out. They would aim to flank us and
attack the archers. Our cavalry needs to meet them midfield.’
‘Yes, my Lord,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘I had expected this move from the Chandravanshis.
That’s why I had positioned two cavalries, comprising the Arishtanemi, led by
Mayashrenik and Vidyunmali, on the flanks.’
‘Perfect! But General, our cavalry must not move too far ahead or our arrows will injure
our own men. Nor must they retreat. They have to hold their position. At least for
another five minutes.’
‘I agree. Our archers need that much time to finish their job.’
Parvateshwar turned to his flag bearer with detailed instructions. Two couriers set off
rapidly to the left and right. Within moments, the eastern and western Arishtanemi, led
by Mayashrenik and Vidyunmali respectively, thundered out to meet the Chandravanshi
counter-attack.
Meanwhile, the disarray in the second legion of the Chandravanshi army only increased
as the unrelenting and ruthless wall of arrows pounded down on them. The Suryavanshi
archers, unmindful of their tiring limbs or bleeding hands, bravely continued their

 unremitted assault. The second legion line started breaking as the Chandravanshis tried
desperately to escape the ruthless carnage.
‘Higher range, my Lord?’ asked Parvateshwar,
pre-empting Shiva’s words. Shiva
nodded in reply.
Meanwhile the Suryavanshi
and Chandravanshi
cavalries were engaged in fierce
combat on the eastern and western ends of the batdefield. The Chandravanshis knew
they had to break through. A few more minutes of the Suryavanshi archers’ assault and
the batde would be all but lost. They fought desperately, like wounded tigers. Swords
cut through flesh and bone. Spears pierced body armour. Soldiers, with limbs hanging
half-severed, continued to battle away. Horses, with their riders missing, attacked as if
their own kves depended on it. The Chandravanshis were throwing all their might into
breaking through the line that protected the archers. But to their misfortune, they had
run into the fiercest brigadiers amongst the Suryavanshis. Mayashrenik and Vidyunmali
fought ferociously, holding the mammoth Chandravanshi force at bay.
The archers meanwhile had begun their onslaught on the third legion of the
Chandravanshis.
Their legions were bleeding to death or deserting in great numbers.
Some of them, however, grimly and courageously, held on. When their shields were not
strong enough to block the arrows, they used the bodies of their dead comrades. But
they held the line.
‘Do we stop now and charge, my Lord?’ asked Parvateshwar.
‘No. I want the third legion devastated as well. Let it go on for a few more minutes.’
‘Yes, my Lord. We should also let half the archers raise their range a bit more. We can
get the weaker sections in the fourth legion as well. If their lines are also broken,
confusion would rein right into the heart of their troops.’
‘You are right, Parvateshwar. Let’s do that.’
Meanwhile, the Chandravanshi cavalry on the western flank, sensing the hopelessness
of their charge, began to retreat. Some Arishtanemi riders moved to give chase but
Vidyunmali stopped them. As the Chandravanshis
retreated, Vidyunmali ordered his
troops to wait at their present positions, lest the Chandravanshis
launch a counterattack. Seeing their enemy ride rapidly back to their lines, Vidyunmali ordered a
withdrawal to their initial position on the flank of the bow formation.
The Chandravanshis facing Mayashrenik, however, were made of sterner stuff. Despite
taking severe casualties, they fought grimly, refusing to retreat. Mayashrenik and his
men fought fiercely, holding their enemy. Suddenly, the hail of arrows stopped. The
archers had been ordered to stand down. Now that their mission was accomplished
without their intervention, the Chandravanshi brigadier ordered a retreat of his cavalry.
Mayashrenik, in turn, withdrew his troops quickly to his earlier position to prepare for the
main charge, which he knew was just a few moments away.
‘General, shall we?’ asked Shiva, nodding towards the left flank.
‘Yes, my Lord,’ replied Parvateshwar.
As Parvateshwar turned to mount his horse, Shiva called out, ‘Parvateshwar?’
‘Yes, my Lord.’
‘Race you to the last line of the Chandravanshis!’
Parvateshwar raised his eyebrows in surprise, smiling broadly. ‘I will win, my Lord.’
‘We’ll see,’ grinned Shiva, his eyes narrowed in a playful challenge.
Parvateshwar rapidly mounted his horse and rode to his command on the left. Shiva,
followed by Vraka, Nandi and Veerbhadra rode to the right. Prasanjit geared his tortoise
corps in the centre for the attack.
‘Meluhans!’ roared Shiva, dismounting smoothly. ‘They lie in front of you! Waiting to be
slaughtered! It ends today! Evil ends today!’
‘Har Har Mahadev!’ bellowed the soldiers as the Meluhan conch shell, announcing the
Suryavanshi attack, was blown.

 With an ear-shattering yell, the infantry charged towards the Chandravanshis.
The
tortoise corps moved in their slow, yet unyielding pace towards the Chandravanshi
centre. The sides of the bow formation moved quicker than the centre. The cavalry
cantered along the flanks, protecting the infantry from an enemy charge. Courageous
remnants of the third and fourth legions of the Chandravanshis meanwhile were rapidly
reforming their lines to face the Suryavanshi onslaught. But the mass of dead bodies of
their fallen comrades did not allow them the space needed to form their traditional
Chaturanga formation, which could have allowed some lateral movement. They were
huddled together in a tight but thin line before the Suryavanshis were upon them.
The battle was going almost exactly as per plan for the Suryavanshis. By the time they
reached the Chandravanshi line, they were in a tight, faintly curved line of trained and
vicious soldiers, with their flanking line of light infantry being slightly behind the level of
the slower moving tortoise corps at the centre. The unstoppable tortoise corps tore
ruthlessly into the Chandravanshi centre. The shields provided protection for the corps
against the best Chandravanshi swordsmen, while their trishuls ripped through the
Swadweepans.
The Chandravanshis had but two choices. Either fall to the trishul, or be
pushed towards the sides where the Suryavanshis were now bearing down hard on
them. As the centre of the Chandravanshi army broke under the unrelenting assault, the
Suryavanshi flanks tore through their sides.
Shiva was leading his flank ferociously into the Chandravanshis, decimating all in front
of him. To his surprise, he found the enemy lines thinning. Letting his fellow soldiers
charge ahead of him, he rose to his full height to observe the movements. He was
shocked to see the Chandravanshi line opposing him, moving towards the centre. They
were attacking the only exposed flank of the tortoise corps, their right side, which could
not be protected by shields. Someone in the Chandravanshi army was using his brains.
If any of the tortoises broke, the Chandravanshis would swarm through the centre in a
tight line, devastating the Suryavanshis.
‘Meluhans!’ roared Shiva. ‘Follow me!’
Shiva’s flag bearer raised his pennant. The soldiers followed. The Neelkanth charged
into the sides of the Chandravanshi lines bearing down on the tortoises. Caught in a
pincer attack between the trishuls and the charge from Shiva’s flank, the spirit of the
Chandravanshis finally broke.
What was a mighty Chandravanshi army was now reduced to independent stragglers
fighting valiantly for a losing cause. Shiva and Parvateshwar led their respective sides
to complete the job. The victory was absolute. The Chandravanshi army had been
comprehensively routed.

  
CHAPTER 24
A Stunning Revelation
 
Sati rushed out of her tent, followed by Krittika and Ayurvati.
‘A little slowly, Sati,’ cried Ayurvati, running to keep up. ‘In your condition…’
Sati turned and grinned back at Ayurvati, but did not reduce her pace. She sprinted to
the royal tent where she had been informed Shiva and Parvateshwar had reached after
the declaration of victory. Nandi and Veerbhadra stood guard at the entrance. They
moved aside to let Sati in, but barred Ayurvati and Krittika.
‘I am sorry, Lady Ayurvati,’ said Nandi apologetically, his head bowed. ‘I have strict
instructions not to let anybody in.’
‘Why?’ asked a surprised Ayurvati.
‘I don’t know, my Lady. I am very sorry’
‘That’s alright,’ said Ayurvati. ‘You’re only doing your job.’
Veerbhadra looked at Krittika. ‘I’m sorry darling.’
‘Please don’t call me that in public,’ whispered Krittika, embarrassed.
Sati pulled the curtain aside and entered the tent.
‘I don’t know, my Lord,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘It doesn’t make sense.’
Sati was surprised at Parvateshwar calling Shiva ‘My Lord’.
But her joy at seeing Shiva safe brushed these thoughts aside. ‘Shiva!’
‘Sati?’ mumbled Shiva, turning towards her.
Sati froze. He didn’t smile when he saw her. He didn’t have the flush of victory on his
face. He hadn’t even got his wounds dressed.
‘What’s wrong?’ asked Sati.
Shiva stared at her. His expression
worried her deeply. She turned towards
Parvateshwar. He looked at her for an instant with an obviously forced smile. The way
he usually smiled when he tried to shield her from some bad news. ‘What is it,
Pitratulya?’
Parvateshwar looked at Shiva, who spoke at last. ‘Something about this war troubles
us.’
‘What could trouble you?’ asked a surprised Sati. ‘You have delivered the greatest
victory ever to the Suryavanshis.
This defeat of the Chandravanshis
is even more
comprehensive than what my grandfather achieved. You should be proud!’
‘I didn’t see any Nagas with the Chandravanshis,’ said Shiva.
‘The Nagas weren’t there?’ asked Sati. ‘That doesn’t make sense.’
‘Yes,’ said Shiva, his eyes carrying a hint of foreboding. ‘If they are so thick with the
Chandravanshis, then they would have been there in the battlefield. If they were being
used by the Chandravanshis against us, then their skills would have been even more
useful in the battle. But where were they?’
‘Maybe they’ve fallen out with each other,’ suggested Sati.
‘I don’t think so,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘This war was triggered by their joint attack on
Mandar! Why would they not be here?’
‘Shiva, I am sure you’ll figure it out,’ said Sati. ‘Don’t trouble yourself.’
‘Dammit Sati!’ yelled Shiva. ‘I can’t figure it out! That’s why I am worried!’
A startled Sati stepped back. His uncharacteristic vehemence stunned her. He wasn’t
like this. Shiva realised what he had done. He immediately reached his bloodied hand
out. ‘I’m sorry Sati. It’s just that I…’

 The conversation was interrupted as Daksha, accompanied by an aide, raised the
curtain and swaggered into the room.
‘My Lord!’ cried Daksha as he hugged Shiva tight.
Shiva flinched. His wounds hurt. Daksha immediately stepped back.
‘I’m so sorry, my Lord,’ said Daksha. Turning to his aide he continued, ‘Why is Ayurvati
outside? Bring her in. Let her tend to the Lord’s wounds.’
‘No wait,’ said Shiva to the aide. ‘I had said I didn’t want to be disturbed. There is
always time to address the wounds later.’ Shiva turned towards Daksha. ‘Your
Highness, I need to speak about something…’
‘My Lord, if you will allow me first,’ said Daksha, as enthusiastic as a little boy who had
just been given a long denied sweet. ‘I wanted to thank you for what you have done for
me. For Meluha. We have done what even my father couldn’t! This is an absolute
victory!’
Shiva and Parvateshwar looked briefly at each other before Daksha garnered their
attention again.
‘Emperor Dilipa is being brought here even as we speak,’ said Daksha.
‘What?’ asked Parvateshwar taken aback. ‘But we had sent some of our soldiers to their
camp just a little while back. They couldn’t possibly have arrested him so soon.’
‘No Parvateshwar,’ said Daksha. ‘I had sent my personal guards much earlier. We could
tell from the viewing platform that the Chandravanshis had already lost by the time the
Lord and you began the third charge. That is the benefit of the perspective you get from
a distance. I was worried that Dilipa might escape like the coward he is. So I sent off my
personal guards to arrest him.’
‘But, your Highness,’ said Parvateshwar, ‘shouldn’t we discuss the terms of surrender
before we bring him in? What are we going to offer?’
‘Offer?’ asked Daksha, his eyes twinkling with the euphoria of triumph. ‘Frankly, we
don’t really need to offer anything considering how he was routed. He is being brought
here as a common criminal. However, we will show him how kind Meluha can be. We
will make him such an offer that his next seven generations will be singing our praises!’
Before a surprised Shiva could ask what exactly Daksha had in mind, the crier of the
Royal Guard announced the presence of Dilipa outside the tent. Accompanying him was
his son, Crown Prince Bhagirath.
‘Just a minute, Kaustav,’ said Daksha, as he went into a tizzy, organising the room
exactly as he would like it. He sat down on a chair placed in the centre of the room.
Daksha requested Shiva to sit to his right. As Shiva sat, Sati turned to leave the tent.
Shiva reached out to hold her hand. She turned, saw his need and walked behind his
seat to sit down on a chair there. Parvateshwar sat to the Emperor’s left.
Daksha then called out loudly, ‘Let him in.’
Shiva was anxious to see the face of evil. Despite his misgivings about the absence of
the Nagas, he genuinely believed he had fought a righteous war on the right side. Only
seeing the defeated face of the evil king of the Chandravanshis
would complete the
victory.
Dilipa walked in. Shiva straightened up in surprise. Dilipa was nothing like what he
expected. He had the appearance of an old man, a sight rare in Meluha due to the
Somras. Despite his age, Dilipa had a rakishly handsome bearing. He was of medium
height, had dark skin and a slightly muscular build. His clothes were radically different
from the sober Meluhan fare. A bright pink dhoti, gleaming violet angvastram and a
profusion of gold jewellery adorning most parts of his body, combined to give him the
look of a dandy. His face had the crowfeet of a life lived well. A trimmed salt and pepper
beard, accompanied
by thick white hair under his extravagandy
coloured crown,
completed the effete look while adding an intellectual air.
‘Where’s the Crown Prince Bhagirath?’ asked Daksha.

 ‘I have asked him to wait outside since he can be a little hotheaded,’ said Dilipa. He
looked only at Daksha, refusing to acknowledge the presence of the others in the room.
‘Don’t you Meluhans have any custom of offering a seat to your guests?’
‘You are not a guest, Emperor Dilipa,’ said Daksha. ‘You are a prisoner.’
‘Yes. Yes. I know. Can’t you get a joke?’ asked Dilipa superciliously. ‘So what is it that
you people want this time?’
Daksha stared at Dilipa quizzically.
‘You have already stolen the Yamuna waters a hundred years back,’ continued Dilipa.
‘What else do you want?’
Shiva turned in surprise towards Daksha.
‘We did not steal the Yamuna waters,’ yelled Daksha angrily.
‘They were ours and we took them back!’
‘Yes whatever,’ dismissed Dilipa with a wave of his hand.
‘What are your demands this time?’
Shiva was astonished at how the conversation was going. They had just defeated this
evil man. He should be repentant. But here he was, being condescending and selfrighteous.
Daksha looked at Dilipa with wide eyes and a kindly smile. ‘I don’t want to take
anything. Instead, I want to give you something.’
Dilipa raised his eyebrows warily. ‘Give us something?’
‘Yes, I intend to give you the benefit of our way of life.’
Dilipa continued to stare at Daksha with suspicion.
‘We are going to bring you up to our superior way of life,’ continued Daksha, his eyes
marvelling at his own generosity. ‘We are going to reform you.’
Dilipa said with half a snigger, ‘R eform us?’
‘Yes. My general, Parvateshwar,
will run your empire from now on as Viceroy of
Swadweep. You will continue to be the titular head. Parvateshwar will ensure that your
corrupt people are brought in line with the Meluhan way of life. We will live together as
brothers now.’
Parvateshwar turned towards Daksha, stunned. He did not expect to be despatched to
Swadweep.
Dilipa appeared to have difficulty in controlling his laughter. ‘You actually think your
straight-laced men can run Swadweep? My people are mercurial. They are not going to
listen to your moralising!’
‘Oh, they will,’ sneered Daksha. ‘They will listen to everything we say. Because you
don’t know where the actual voice comes from.’
‘Really? Where does it come from? Do enlighten me.’
Daksha motioned towards Shiva and said, ‘Look who sits with us.’
Dilipa turned to Daksha’s right and asked incredulously, ‘Who’s he? What in Lord
Indra’s name is so special about him?’
Shiva squirmed, feeling increasingly uncomfortable.
Daksha spoke a little louder. ‘Look at his throat, Oh king of the Chandravanshis.’
Dilipa looked again with the same arrogance towards Shiva. Despite the dried
smattering of blood and gore, the blue throat blazed. Suddenly, Dilipa’s haughty smile
disappeared. He looked shocked. He tried to say something, but he was at a loss of
words.
‘Yes, oh corrupt Chandravanshi,’ scoffed Daksha, moving his hands for dramatic effect.
‘We have the Neelkanth.’
Dilipa’s eyes had the dazed look of a child who had just discovered that the hand that
brutally knifed his back belonged to his beloved father. Shiva’s heart was disturbed with
increased apprehension. This was not the way this meeting was supposed to occur.
Daksha continued his hectoring. ‘The Neelkanth has sworn to destroy the evil

 Chandravanshi way of life. You HAVE to listen.’
A bewildered Dilipa stared at Shiva for what seemed like an eternity. At long last, he
recovered enough to softly whisper, ‘Whatever you say.’
Before Daksha could bluster further, Dilipa turned and staggered towards the tent
curtain. At the exit, he turned around to look at Shiva once again. Shiva swore that he
could see a few tears in those proud, haughty eyes.
As soon as Dilipa left the tent, Daksha got up and hugged Shiva, lightly, so as to not
hurt the Neelkanth. ‘My Lord, did you see the look on his face. It was precious!’
Turning towards Parvateshwar, he continued, ‘Parvateshwar, Dilipa is broken. You will
have no trouble controlling the Swadweepans
and bringing them around to our way of
life. We will go down in history as the men who found a permanent solution to this
problem!’
Shiva wasn’t paying attention. His troubled heart desperately searched for answers.
How could a struggle that appeared so righteous, just a few hours back, now suddenly
appear wrong? He turned towards Sati, forlorn. She gently touched his shoulder.
‘What are you thinking, my Lord?’ asked Daksha, intruding into Shiva’s troubled
thoughts.
Shiva just shook his head.
‘I just asked if you would like to travel in Dilipa’s carriage to Ayodhya?’ asked Daksha.
‘You deserve the honour, my Lord. You have led us to this glorious day’
This conversation did not appear important to Shiva at this point. He did not have the
energy to think of an answer. He just nodded in an absentminded manner.
‘Wonderful. I’ll make all the arrangements,’ said Daksha. Turning towards his aide, he
continued, ‘Send Ayurvati in to immediately dress the Lord’s wounds. We need to leave
by tomorrow morning to make sure that we have control over Ayodhya, before chaos
reigns in the aftermath of Dilipa’s defeat.’
With a namaste towards Shiva, Daksha turned to leave. ‘Parvateshwar,
aren’t you
coming?’
Parvateshwar gazed at Shiva, his face creased with concern.
‘Parvateshwar?’ repeated Daksha.
Taking a quick look at Sati, Parvateshwar turned to leave. Sati moved forward, holding
Shiva’s face gently. Shiva’s eyes seemed to droop with the heavy weight of tiredness.
Ayurvati lifted the curtain carefully. ‘How are you, my Lord?’
Shiva looked up, his eyes half shut. He was descending into a strange sleep. He yelled
suddenly, ‘Nandi!’
Nandi came rushing in.
‘Nandi, can you find me a cravat?’
‘Cravat, my Lord?’ asked Nandi.
‘Yes.’
‘Umm. But why, my Lord?’
‘BECAUSE I NEED IT!’ shouted Shiva.
Nandi, shocked at the violence of his Lord’s reply, hurried out. Sati and Ayurvati looked
at Shiva in surprise. Before they could say anything, he suddenly collapsed.
Unconscious.

 
He was running hard, the menacing forest closing in on him. He was desperate to get
beyond the trees before they laid their ravenous claws on him. Suddenly, a loud
insistent cry pierced through the silence.
‘Help! Please help!’
He stopped. No. He wouldn’t run away this time. He would fight that monster. He was

 the Mahadev. It was his duty. Shiva turned around slowly, his sword drawn, his shield
held high.
‘Jai Shri Ram!’ he yelled, as he raced back to the clearing. The bushy thorns slashed
his legs. Bleeding and terrified, he ran hard.
I will reach her in time.
I will not fail her again.
My blood will wash away my sin .
He sprang through the last clump of shrubs, letting the thorns cut greedily at his flesh,
and leapt into the clearing. His shield held defensively, his sword gripped low to
retaliate. But nobody attacked. It was a strange laughter that finally broke his
concentration. He lowered his shield. Slowly.
‘Oh Lord!’ he shrieked in agony.
The woman lay stricken on the ground, a short sword buried into her heart. The little boy
stood on her side. Stunned. His hand bloodied with the struggle of his kill. The hairy
monster sat on the rocky ledge, pointing at the little boy. Laughing.
‘NO!’ screamed Shiva, as he jerked himself awake.
‘What happened, Shiva?’ asked a worried Sati, darting to hold his hand.
Shiva looked around the room, startled. A worried Parvateshwar and Ayurvati got up
too. ‘My Lord?’
‘Shiva, it’s alright. It’s alright,’ whispered Sati, gently running her hand along Shiva’s
face.
‘You were poisoned, my Lord,’ said Ayurvati. ‘We think that some of the Chandravanshi
soldiers may have had poisoned weapons. It has affected many others as well.’
Shiva slowly regained his composure. He got off his bed. Sati tried to help him up, but
he insisted on doing it himself. His throat felt excruciatingly parched. He stumbled over
to the ewer, followed closely by Sati. He reached over and gulped down some water.
‘It seems like I have been asleep for many hours,’ said Shiva, finally noticing the lamps
and dark sky beyond.
‘Yes,’ said a worried Ayurvati. ‘Close to thirty-six hours.’
‘Thirty-six hours!’ cried a surprised Shiva, before collapsing on to a comfortable chair.
He noticed a forbidding figure sitting at the back, his right eye covered in a bandage, his
amputated left hand in a sling. ‘Drapaku?’
‘Yes, my Lord,’ said Drapaku, as he tried to get up and salute.
‘My God, Drapaku! It’s so good to see you. Please sit down!’
‘It is heavenly to see you, my Lord,’
‘How was your end of the battle?’
‘I lost too many men, my Lord. Almost half of them. And this arm and eye,’ whispered
Drapaku. ‘But by your grace, we held them till the main battle was won.’
‘It wasn’t my grace, my friend. It was your bravery,’ said Shiva. ‘I am proud of you.’
‘Thank you, my Lord.’
Sati stood next to her husband, gently caressing his hair. ‘Are you sure you want to sit,
Shiva? You can lie down for a while.’
‘I have slouched around enough, Sati,’ said Shiva with a weak smile.
Ayurvati smiled. ‘Well, the poison certainly didn’t affect your sense of humour, my Lord.’
‘Really? Is it still that bad?’ grinned Shiva.
Parvateshwar, Drapaku and Ayurvati laughed weakly. Sati didn’t. She was watching
Shiva intently. He was trying too hard. He was trying to forget, trying to get others to
focus on something other than himself. Was this dream much worse than the others?
‘Where is his Highness?’ asked Shiva.
‘Father left for Ayodhya this morning,’ said Sati.
‘My Lord,’ said Parvateshwar, ‘His Highness felt it would not be right to keep Swadweep
without a sovereign for so long, considering the circumstances. He felt it important that

 the Suryavanshi army be marched across the empire immediately, with Emperor Dilipa
as prisoner, so that the Swadweepans know and accept the new dispensation.’
‘So we’re not going to Ayodhya?’
‘We will, my Lord,’ said Ayurvati. ‘But in a few days when you are strong enough.’
‘Some twelve thousand of our soldiers remain with us,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘We will
march to Ayodhya when you are ready. His Highness insisted that Emperor Dilipa leave
behind one of his family members with our unit as hostage to ensure that no
Swadweepan attacks our much smaller force.’
‘So we have one of Emperor Dilipa’s family members in our camp?’
‘Yes, my Lord,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘His daughter, Princess Anandmayi.’
Ayurvati smiled, shaking her head slightly.
‘What?’ asked Shiva.
Ayurvati looked sheepishly at Parvateshwar and then grinned at Sati. Parvateshwar
glared back at Ayurvati.
‘What happened?’ asked Shiva again.
‘Nothing that important, my Lord,’ clarified Parvateshwar,
looking strangely
embarrassed. ‘It’s just that she is quite a handful.’
‘Well, I’ll ensure that I remain out of her way then,’ said Shiva, smiling.

 
‘So this route seems to make the most sense,’ said Parvateshwar, pointing at the map.
Shiva, and the other poisoned soldiers, had recovered completely over the previous five
days. The march to Ayodhya was scheduled the next day.
‘I think you are right,’ said Shiva, his mind going back to the meeting with the Emperor
of Swadweep.
No point in thinking about Dilipa. I’m sure he was acting during the meeting. The
Chandravanshis are evil. They are capable of any deception. Our war was righteous.
‘We plan to leave tomorrow morning, my Lord,’ said Parvateshwar. Turning towards
Sati, he continued, ‘You can finally see the birthplace of Lord Ram, my child.’
‘Yes Pitratulya,’ smiled Sati. ‘But I don’t know if these people would have kept his
temple unharmed. They may have destroyed it in their hatred.’
Their conversation was interrupted by a loud commotion.
Parvateshwar turned with a frown. ‘What is going on out there, Nandi?’
‘My Lord,’ said Nandi from the other side of the curtain. ‘The Princess Anandmayi is
here. She has some demands. But we can’t fulfil them. She insists on meeting you.’
‘Please tell her Highness to wait in her tent,’ growled Parvateshwar. ‘I will be over in a
few minutes.’
‘I cannot wait General!’ screamed a strong, yet feminine voice from across the curtain.
Shiva signalled to Parvateshwar to let her in. Parvateshwar turned towards the curtain.
‘Nandi, Veerbhadra, bring her in. But check her first for any weapons.’
In a few moments, Anandmayi, flanked by Nandi and Veerbhadra, entered Shiva’s tent.
Shiva raised his eyebrow at her presence. She was taller than her father. And
distractingly beautiful. A deep walnut coloured complexion complemented a body that
was bountifully voluptuous, yet healthy. Her doe-shaped eyes were in a seductive halfstare, while her lips were in a perpetual pout that was sensual yet intimidating. She was
provocatively clothed, with a dhoti that had been tied dangerously low at the waist and
ended many inches above her knees, while being tied agonizingly tight at her
curvaceous hips. It was just a little longer than the loincloth that the Meluhan men tied
during their ceremonial baths. Her blouse was similar to the cloth piece that Meluhan
women tied, except that it had been cut raunchily on the top to the shape of her ample
breasts, affording a full view of her generous cleavage. She stood with her hips tilted to

 the side, exuding raw passion.
‘You really think I can hide some weapons in this?’ charged Anandmayi, pointing at her
clothes.
A startled Nandi and Sati glared at her, while Shiva and Veerbhadra sported a surprised
smile. Parvateshwar shook his head slightly.
‘How are you doing, Parvateshwar?’ asked Anandmayi, flashing a smile while scanning
him from top to bottom, her eyebrows raised lasciviously.
Shiva couldn’t help smiling as he saw Parvateshwar blush slightly.
‘What is it you desire, Princess?’ barked Parvateshwar. ‘We are in the middle of an
important meeting’
‘Will you really give me what I desire, General?’ sighed Anandmayi.
Parvateshwar blushed even deeper. ‘Princess, we have no time for nonsensical talk!’
‘Yes,’ groaned Anandmayi. ‘Most unfortunate. Then perhaps you can help me get some
milk and rose petals in this sorry little camp you are running.’
Parvateshwar turned towards Nandi in surprise. Nandi blabbered, ‘My Lord, she doesn’t
want just a glass, but fifty litres of milk. We can’t allow that with our rations.’
‘You are going to drink fifty litres of milk?’ cried Parvateshwar,
his eyes wide in
astonishment.
‘I need it for my beauty bath, General!’ glowered Anandmayi. ‘You are going to take us
on a long march from tomorrow. I cannot go unprepared.’
‘I will try and see what I can do,’ said Parvateshwar.
‘Don’t try , General. Do it,’ admonished Anandmayi.
Shiva couldn’t control himself any longer. He burst out laughing.
‘What the hell do you think you are laughing at?’ glared Anandmayi, turning towards
Shiva.
‘You will speak to the Lord with respect, Princess,’ yelled Parvateshwar.
‘The Lord?’ grinned Anandmayi. ‘So he is the one in charge? The one Daksha was
allegedly showing off?’
She turned back towards Shiva. ‘What did you say to trouble my father so much that he
isn’t even talking anymore? You don’t look that threatening to me.’
‘Be careful about what you say, Princess,’ advised Parvateshwar fiercely. ‘You don’t
know whom you are speaking with.’
Shiva raised his hand at Parvateshwar, signalling him to calm down. But Anandmayi
was the one who required soothing.
‘Whoever you are, you will all be smashed when our Lord comes. When he descends to
Swadweep and destroys the evil of your kind.’
What?!
‘Take her out of here, Nandi,’ yelled Parvateshwar.
‘No wait,’ said Shiva. Turning towards Anandmayi, he asked, ‘What did you mean by
saying “when your Lord will descend
to Swadweep
and destroy the evil of our kind”?’
‘Why should I answer you, Parvateshwar’s
Lord?’
Parvateshwar moved rapidly, drawing his sword and pointing it close to Anandmayi’s
neck. ‘When the Lord asks something, you will answer!’
‘Do you always move that fast?’ asked Anandmayi, her eyebrows raised saucily. ‘Or can
you take it slow sometimes?’
Bringing his sword threateningly closer, Parvateshwar
repeated, ‘Answer the Lord,
Princess.’
Shaking her head, Anandmayi turned towards Shiva. ‘We wait for our Lord who will
come to Swadweep and destroy the evil Suryavanshis.’
Strong lines of worry began creasing Shiva’s handsome face. ‘Who is your Lord?’
‘I don’t know. He hasn’t shown himself as yet.’
An unfathomable foreboding sunk deep into Shiva’s heart. He was profoundly afraid of

 his next question. But something inside told him that he had to ask it. ‘How will you
know he is your Lord?’
‘Why are you so interested in this?’
‘I need to know!’ snarled Shiva.
Anandmayi frowned at Shiva as if he was mad. ‘He will not be from the Sapt-Sindhu.
Neither a Suryavanshi nor a Chandravanshi. But when he comes, he will come on our
side.’
Shiva’s inner voice whispered miserably that there was more. Clutching the armrest of
his chair, he asked, ‘And?’
‘And,’ continued Anandmayi, ‘his throat will turn blue when he drinks the Somras.’
An audible gasp escaped Shiva as his body stiffened. The world seemed to spin.
Anandmayi frowned, even more confused about the strange conversation.
Parvateshwar glowered fiercely at Anandmayi. ‘You are lying, woman! Admit it! You are
lying!’
‘Why would I…’
Anandmayi stopped in mid-sentence as she noticed Shiva’s cravat covered throat. The
arrogance suddenly vanished from her face. She found her knees buckling under her.
Pointing weakly with her hands, she asked, ‘Why is your throat covered?’
‘Take her out, Nandi!’ ordered Parvateshwar.
‘Who are you?’ shouted Anandmayi.
Nandi and Veerbhadra tried to pull Anandmayi out. With surprising strength, she
struggled against them. ‘Show me your throat!’
They held on to her arms and dragged her backwards. She kicked Veerbhadra in the
groin, causing him to fall back in pain as she turned towards Shiva once again. ‘Who the
hell are you?’
Shiva stared down at the table unable to find the strength to even glance at Anandmayi.
He held his armrest tightly. It seemed to be the only stable thing in a world spinning
desperately out of control.
Veerbhadra staggered back, held her arms tighdy and pulled her back as Nandi held
her by the neck. Anandmayi bit Nandi’s arm brutally. As a howling Nandi pulled his arm
back, she screamed again, ‘Answer me, dammit! Who are you?’
Shiva looked up for one brief instant at Anandmayi’s tormented eyes. The pain they
conveyed lashed his soul. The flames of agony burned his conscience.
A shocked Anandmayi suddenly became immobile. The misery in her eyes would have
stunned the bravest of Meluhan soldiers. In a broken voice, she whispered, ‘You are
supposed to be on our side…’
She allowed herself to be hauled out by Nandi and Veerbhadra. Parvateshwar kept his
eyes down. He dared not look at Shiva. He was a good Suryavanshi. He would not
humiliate his Lord by looking at him at his weakest. Sati, on the other hand, would not
leave her husband to suffer alone, by not looking at him when he was at his weakest.
She came to his side, touching his face.
Shiva looked up, his eyes devastated with the tears of sorrow. ‘What have I done?’
Sati held Shiva tightly, holding his throbbing head against her bosom. There was
nothing she could say to alleviate the pain. She could just hold him.
An agonized whisper suffused the tent with its resonant grief. ‘What have I done?’

  
CHAPTER 25
Island of the Individual
 
It was another three weeks before Shiva’s entourage reached Ayodhya, the capital of
the Swadweepans.
They had travelled along a decrepit, long-winding road to the
Ganga, and then sailed eastward to the point where the mighty, yet capricious, river
passionately welcomed the waters of the Sarayu. Then they had cruised north, up the
Sarayu, to the city of Lord Ram’s birth. It was a long circuitous route, but the quickest
possible considering the terrible road conditions in Swadweep
, the island of the
individual .
The excitement in the hearts of the Meluhan soldiers was beyond compare. They had
only heard legends about Lord Ram’s city. None had ever seen it. Ayodhya , literally
the impregnable
city , was the land first blessed by Lord Ram’s sacred feet. They
expected a gleaming city beyond compare, even if it had been devastated by the
Chandravanshi presence. They expected the city to be an oasis of order and harmony
even if all the surrounding land had been rendered chaotic by the Chandravanshis.
They were disappointed.
Ayodhya was nothing like Devagiri. At first glance, it promised much. The outer walls
were thick and looked astonishingly powerful. Unlike the sober grey Meluhan walls, the
exterior of Ayodhya had been extravagantly painted with every colour in god’s universe.
Each alternate brick, however, was painted in pristine white, the royal colour of the
Chandravanshis. Numerous banners, tinted in pink and blue, had been festooned down
the city towers. The banners weren’t put up for a special occasion, but were permanent
fixtures, adorning the city.
The empire road curved suddenly along the fort wall to the main entrance, so as to
prevent elephants and battering rams from getting a straight run to the mighty doors. At
the top of the main gates, a wonderfully ornate, horizontal crescent moon had been
sculpted into the walls. Below it was the Chandravanshi motto. ‘Shringar. Saundarya.
Swatantrata.’
Passion. Beauty. Freedom .
It was only when one entered the city that it delivered a blow to the precision and order
loving Meluhans. Krittika described the city’s organisation
best as ‘functioning
pandemonium’. Unlike all Meluhan cities, Ayodhya was not built on a platform — so it
was obvious that if the Sarayu river ever flooded in the manner that the temperamental
Indus did, the city would be inundated. The numerous city walls, built in seven
concentric circles, were surprisingly thick and strong. However, it didn’t take a general’s
strategic eye to see that the concentric walls had not been planned by a military
mastermind. They were in fact added in a haphazard manner, one by one, after the city
had burst its seams and extended beyond the previous perimeter. That is why there
were many weak points along each wall, which an enemy laying siege could easily
exploit. Perhaps that’s why the Chandravanshis preferred to take wars outside to a far
away battleground rather than defend their city.
The infrastructure was a sorry indictment of the Chandravanshi penchant for debate as
an excuse for action. The roads were nothing better than dirt tracks. There was,
however, one notable exception — the neatly paved and strikingly smooth Rajpath , the
royal road , which led straight from the outer walls through to the opulent royal palace.
The Swadweepans joked that instead of finding potholes on their road, they actually had
to search for some stretch of road amongst the potholes! This was a far cry from the

 exceptionally
well-planned,
sign-posted,
paved and tediously standard roads of
Meluhan cities.
There were, what can only be called ‘encroachments’,
all over the city. Some open
grounds had been converted into giant slums as illegal immigrants simply pitched their
tents on public areas. The already narrow roads had been made even narrower by the
intrusion of the cloth tents of the homeless. There was constant tension between the
richer home owning class and the poor landless who lived in slums. The emperor had
legalised all encroachments established before 1910 BC. That meant that slum dwellers
could not be removed unless the government created alternate accommodation for
them. The minor problem was that the Chandravanshi government was so hideously
inefficient that they hadn’t managed to build even one new house for slum dwellers in
the last twelve years. Now there was talk about extending the deadline further. The
encroachments, the bad roads, the poor construction combined to give an impression of
a city in a state of terminal decline.
The Meluhans were outraged. What had these people done to Lord Ram’s great city?
Or was it always like this? Is that why Lord Ram had crossed the Sarayu river to
establish his capital at far away Devagiri on the Saraswati?
And yet, as the initial shock of the ugliness and frenzied disorder wore away, the
Meluhans started finding strange and unexpected charm about this city in constant
chaos. None of the Ayodhyan houses were similar, unlike the Meluhan cities where
even the royal palace was built to a standard design. Here each house had its own
individual allure. The Swadweepans,
unencumbered by strict rules and building codes,
created houses that were expressions of passion and elegance. Some structures were
so grand that even the Meluhans couldn’t imagine what divine engineering talent could
create them. The Swadweepans
had none of the restraint of the Meluhans. Everything
was painted bright — from orange buildings to parrot green ceilings to shocking pink
windows! Civic-minded rich Swadweepans
had created grand public gardens, temples,
theatres and libraries, naming them after their family members, since they had received
no help from the government. The Meluhans, despite finding it strange that a public
building should be named after a private family, were awed by the grandeur of these
structures. A vibrant city, with exquisite beauty existing side by side with hideous
ugliness, Ayodhya disgusted and yet fascinated the Meluhans.
The people were living embodiments of the Chandravanshi way of life. The women
wore skimpy clothes, brazen and confident about their sexuality. The men were as
fashion and beauty conscious as their women — what Meluhans would call dandies.
The relationship between the men and women could only be characterised as one
teetering on extremes. Extreme love coexisting with extreme hate, expressed with
extreme loudness, all built on the foundations of extreme passion. Nothing was done in
small measure in Ayodhya. Moderation was a word that did not exist in their dictionary.
Therefore, it was no surprise that the emotional, mercurial and uncontrollable rabble of
Ayodhya scoffed at Daksha’s proclaimed intention to ‘reform’ them. Daksha entered a
sullen city, as its populace stood quietly on the sides of the Rajpath, refusing to
welcome the conquering force. Daksha, who had expected the Ayodhya residents to
welcome him with showers of flowers since they had finally been freed from their evil
rulers, was surprised at the cold reception he got. He put it down to enforcement by the
Chandravanshi royalty.
Shiva, who arrived a week later, was under no such illusions. He had expected far
worse than just a quiet greeting. He expected to be attacked. He expected to be vilified
for not standing up for the Swadweepans,
who also believed in the legend of the
Neelkanth. He expected to be hated for choosing the so-called wrong side. But while he
had come to suspect that the Chandravanshis were not quite evil, he was not prepared
to classify the Suryavanshis as the ‘wrong side’ either. In his opinion, the Meluhans

 were almost without exception honest, decent, law-abiding people who could be
unvaryingly trusted. Shiva was deeply confused about his karma and his future course
of action. He missed Brahaspati’s keen wit and advice.
His thoughts weighing heavy on him, Shiva quickly disembarked from the curtained cart
and turned towards the Chandravanshi palace. For a moment, he was startled by the
grandeur of Dilipa’s abode. But he quickly gathered his wits, reached out for Sati’s
hand, and began climbing the hundred steps towards the main palace platform.
Parvateshwar
trudged slowly behind. Shiva glanced briefly beyond Sati, to find
Anandmayi ascending the steps quietly. She had not spoken to Shiva since that terrible
encounter when she realised who Shiva was. She kept climbing with an impassive face,
devoid of any expression, her eyes set on her father.
‘Who the hell is that man?’ asked an incredulous Swadweepan carpenter, held back at
the edge of the palace courtyard by Chandravanshi soldiers.
‘Why are our Emperor and the sincere madman waiting for him on the royal platform,
and that too in full imperial regalia?’
‘Sincere madman?’ asked his friend.
‘Oh, haven’t you heard? That is the new nickname for that fool Daksha!’
The friends burst out laughing.
‘Shush!’ hissed an old man, standing next to them. ‘Don’t you young people have any
sense? Ayodhya is being humiliated and you are joking around.’
Meanwhile, Shiva had reached the royal platform. Daksha bent low with a namaste as
Shiva smiled weakly and returned the greeting.
Dilipa, his eyes moist, bent low towards Shiva. He cried in a soft whisper, ‘I am not evil,
my Lord. We are not evil.’
‘What was that?’ asked Daksha, his ears straining to hear Dilipa’s whispered words.
Shiva’s choked throat refused to utter a sound. Not hearing anything from Dilipa either,
Daksha shook his head and whispered, ‘My Lord, perhaps this is an opportune time to
introduce you to the people of Ayodhya. I am sure it will galvanize them into action once
they know that the Neelkanth has come to their rescue.’
Before an anguished Shiva could answer, his caring wife spoke, ‘Father, Shiva is very
tired. It has been a long journey. May he rest for some time?’
‘Yes, of course,’ mumbled Daksha apologetically. Turning towards Shiva, he said, ‘I am
sorry, my Lord. Sometimes my enthusiasm gets the better of me. Why don’t you rest
today? We can always introduce you at the court tomorrow.’
Shiva looked up at Dilipa’s angst ridden eyes. Unable to bear the tormented gaze any
longer, Shiva looked beyond the Chandravanshi
emperor, towards his courtiers
standing at the back. Only one pair of eyes did not have a look of incomprehension. It
was at that moment that Shiva realised that except for Anandmayi, nobody else in
Dilipa’s court knew of his identity. Not even Dilipa’s son, Bhagirath. Dilipa had not
spoken to a soul. Clearly, neither had Daksha. Possibly in the hope of a grand unveiling
of the secret, in the presence of Shiva himself.
‘My Lord.’
Shiva turned towards Parvateshwar. ‘Yes,’ he said in a, barely audible whisper.
‘I will lead the army out since the ceremonial march is over,’ said Parvateshwar. ‘They
will be stationed outside the city in the camp for the earlier contingent. I will be back at
your service within two hours.’
Shiva nodded faintly.

 
It had been a few hours since their arrival in Ayodhya. Shiva had not spoken a word. He
stood quietly at the window of his chamber, staring out at the city as the afternoon sun

 bore down in its dazzling glory. Sati sat silently to his side, holding his hand, drawing all
the energy that she had and passing it to him. He continued to stare out, towards a
grand structure right in the heart of the city. The structure, from this distance, appeared
to be built of white marble. For an unfathomable reason, looking at it seemed to soothe
Shiva’s soul. It was built upon the highest point in the city, on a gently sloping hill,
clearly visible from every part of Ayodhya. Shiva thought it odd. Why was that building
so important that it occupied the highest point in the city, instead of the royal palace?
A loud insistent knocking disturbed his thoughts.
‘Who is it?’ growled Parvateshwar, rising from his chair at the back of the chamber.
‘My Lord,’ answered Nandi. ‘It is the Princess Anandmayi.’
Parvateshwar groaned softly before turning towards Shiva. The Neelkanth nodded.
‘Let her in, Nandi,’ ordered Parvateshwar.
Anandmayi entered, her smiling demeanour startling Parvateshwar who frowned in
suspicious surprise. ‘How may I help you, your Highness?’
‘I have told you so many times how you can help me, Parvateshwar,’
teased
Anandmayi. ‘Perhaps if you listened to the answer rather than repeating the question
again and again, we may actually get somewhere.’
Parvateshwar’s reaction was a combination of embarrassment and anger. Shiva smiled
weakly, for the first time in three weeks. For some reason, the fact that Anandmayi
seemed to have returned to her original self made Shiva happy.
Anandmayi turned towards Shiva with a low bow. ‘The truth has just come to me, my
Lord. I am sorry about my sullenness earlier. But I was deeply troubled at the time. Your
being on the side of the Suryavanshis can have only one of two explanations. Either we
are evil. Or you are not who we think you are and the legend is false. Accepting either of
these explanations would destroy my soul.’
Shiva looked at Anandmayi attentively.
‘But I realised only now,’ continued Anandmayi. The legend is not false. And we are
obviously not evil. It is just that you are too naive. You have been misled by the evil
Suryavanshis. I will set it right. I will show you the goodness of our path.’
‘We are not evil,’ glowered Parvateshwar.
‘Parvateshwar,’ sighed Anandmayi. ‘I have told you before. That lovely mouth of yours
has much better uses than talking. You shouldn’t waste your breath unnecessarily.’
‘Stop your impudence, woman!’ cried Parvateshwar. You think we are evil? Have you
seen the way you treat your own people. Hungry eyes have stared at me all through our
journey. Children lie abandoned on the side of potholed highways. Old desperate
women beg for alms all through your “impregnable city”, while the Swadweepan rich
lead lives better than a Meluhan emperor. We have a perfect society in Meluha. I may
agree with the Lord and accept that maybe you are not evil. But you certainly don’t
know how to take care of your people. Come to Meluha to see how citizens should be
treated. All your lives will improve with our way of governance.’
‘Improve?’ argued an agitated Anandmayi. ‘We are not perfect, I agree. There are many
things that our empire could do better, I agree. But at least we give our people freedom.
They are not forced to follow some stupid laws mandated by an out of touch elite.’
‘Give them freedom? Freedom to do what? Loot, steal, beg, kill?’
‘I don’t need to argue with you on our culture. Your puny mind will not be able to
understand the benefit of our ways.’
‘I don’t want to! It disgusts me to see the way this empire has been managed. You have
no norms. No control. No laws. It is no wonder that despite not being evil, you have
contaminated your hands by allying with the Nagas. By fighting like coward terrorists
and not brave Kshatriyas. You may not be evil, but your deeds certainly are!’
‘Nagas? What the bloody hell are you talking about? Do you think we are mad that we
will ally with the Nagas? You think we don’t know how that will pollute our souls for the

 next seven lives? And terrorism? We have never resorted to terrorism. We have
strained against our natural instincts to avoid a war with your cursed people for the last
hundred years. Hence we have retreated from the border provinces. We have cut all
ties with you. We have even learned to live with the lower flow of the Ganga since you
stole the Yamuna from us. My father told you that we had nothing to do with the attack
on Mount Mandar! But you did not believe us. And why should you? You needed an
excuse to attack us again!’
‘Don’t lie to me. At least not in front of the Mahadev! Chandravanshi terrorists have
been found with the Nagas.’
‘My father told you that nobody under our control had anything to do with the attack on
Mandar. We have nothing to do with the Nagas. It’s possible that some
Chandravanshis,
just like some Suryavanshis, could have helped the terrorists. If you
had worked with us, we may have even found the criminals!’
‘What rubbish is this? No Suryavanshi would ally with those monsters. As for some
Chandravanshis
assisting the terrorists, you’ll have to answer for that. Swadweep is
under your control!’
‘If you had kept diplomatic relations with Swadweep, you would have known that we are
a confederacy, not authoritarian like you. Ayodhya is only the overlord. Other kings
within Swadweep pay us tribute for protection during war. Otherwise, they have the
freedom to run their kingdoms any way they choose.’
‘How is that possible? You’re saying the Emperor of Swadweep doesn’t run his own
empire?’
‘Please,’ begged Shiva, stopping the argument which reflected the debate raging in his
mind. He did not want to be troubled by questions for which he had no answers. At least
not yet.
Parvateshwar and Anandmayi immediately fell silent.
Turning slowly towards the window again, he asked, ‘What is that building, Anandmayi?’
‘That, my Lord,’ said Anandmayi, smiling happily at being spoken to first, ‘is the
Ramjanmabhoomi
temple, built at the site of Lord Ram’s birthplace .’
‘You have built a temple to Lord Ram?’ asked a startled Parvateshwar. ‘But he was a
Suryavanshi. Your sworn enemy.’
‘We did not build the temple,’ said Anandmayi, raising her eyes in exasperation. ‘But we
have refurbished and maintained it lovingly. And furthermore, what makes you think
Lord Ram was our sworn enemy. He may have been misled to follow a different path,
but he did a lot of good for the Chandravanshis as well. He is respected as a God in
Ayodhya.’
Parvateshwar’s
eyes widened in shock. ‘But he had sworn to destroy the
Chandravanshis.’
‘If he had vowed to destroy us, we wouldn’t exist today, would we? He left us unharmed
because he believed that we were good. That our way of life deserved to survive.’
Parvateshwar was perturbed, out of arguments.
‘You know what Lord Ram’s full ceremonial name is?’ asked Anandmayi, pressing home
her advantage.
‘Of course I do,’ scoffed Parvateshwar.
‘Lord Ram, Suryavanshi
Kshatriya of the
Ikshvaku clan. Son of Dashrath and Kaushalya. Husband of Sita. Honoured and
respected with the tide of the seventh Vishnu.’
‘Perfect,’ beamed Anandmayi. ‘Except for one minor mistake. You have missed one
small word, General. You have missed the word Chandra . His full name was Lord Ram
Chandra.’
Parvateshwar frowned.
‘Yes, General,’ continued Anandmayi. ‘His name meant “the face of the moon” . He was
more Chandravanshi than you know’

 ‘This is typical Chandravanshi double talk,’ argued Parvateshwar, gathering his wits.
‘You are lost in words and names rather than deeds. Lord Ram said that only a person’s
karma determines his identity. The fact that his name had the word moon in it means
nothing. His deeds were worthy of the sun. He was a Suryavanshi,
through and
through.’
‘Why couldn’t he have been both Suryavanshi and Chandravanshi?’
‘What nonsense is that? It’s not possible. It’s contradictory.’
‘It appears impossible to you only because your puny mind cannot understand it.
Contradictions are a part of nature.’
‘No, they aren’t. It is impossible that one thing be true and the opposite not be false. The
universe cannot accept that. One scabbard can have only one sword!’
‘That is only if the scabbard is small. Are you saying that Lord Ram was not big enough
to have two identities?’
‘You are just playing with words!’ glared Parvateshwar.
Shiva had stopped listening. He turned towards the window. Towards the temple. He
could feel it in every pore of his body. He could feel it in his soul. He could hear the soft
whisper of his inner voice.
Lard Ram will help you. He will guide you. He will soothe you. Go to him.

 
It was the third hour of the third prahar when Shiva stole into the chaotic Ayodhya
streets by himself. He was on his way to meet Lord Ram. Sati had not offered to come
along. She knew that he needed to be alone. Wearing a cravat and a loose shawl for
protection, with a sword and shield for abundant precaution, Shiva ambled along, taking
in the strange sights and smells of the Chandravanshi capital. Nobody recognised him.
He liked it that way.
The Ayodhyans seemed to live their life without even the slightest hint of self-control.
Loud emotional voices assaulted Shiva’s ears as if a hideous orchestra was trying to
overpower the senses. The common people either laughed like they had just gulped an
entire bottle of wine or fought like their lives depended on it. Shiva was pushed and
barged on several occasions by people rushing around, hurling obscenities and calling
him blind. There were manic shoppers bargaining with agitated shopkeepers at the
bazaar and it almost seemed like they would come to blows over ridiculously small
amounts of money. For both the shoppers and shopkeepers, the harried negotiation
wasn’t about the cash itself. It was about their honour in having struck a good bargain.
Shiva noticed a large number of couples crowded into a small garden on the side of the
road doing unspeakable things to each other. They seemed to brazenly disregard the
presence of voyeuristic eyes on the street or in the park itself. He noticed with surprise
that the eyes staring from the street were not judgemental, but excited. Shiva noted the
glaring contrast with the Meluhans who would not even embrace each other in public.
Shiva suddenly started in surprise as he felt a feminine hand brush lightly against his
backside. He turned sharply to notice a young woman grin back at him and wink. Before
Shiva could react, he spotted a much older woman walking right behind. Thinking of her
to be the younger woman’s mother, Shiva decided to let the indiscretion pass for fear of
causing any embarrassment.
As he turned, he felt a hand on his backside again, this
time more insistent and aggressive. He turned around and was shocked to find the
mother smiling sensuously at him. A flabbergasted
Shiva hurried down the road,
escaping the bazaar before any more passes could stun his composure.
He continued walking in the direction of the towering Ramjanmabhoomi temple. As he
approached, the unassailable jangle of Ayodhya dimmed significantly. This was a quiet
residential area of the city. Probably for the rich, judging by the exquisite mansions and

 the avenues. Turning to the right, he came upon the road which led to his destination. It
curved smoothly up the hill, caressing its sides in a sensuous arc. This was probably the
only road in Ayodhya, besides the Rajpath, not pitted with potholes. Magnificent
gulmohur trees rose brilliantly along the flanks of the road, their dazzling orange leaves
lighting the path for the weary and the lost. The path leading towards their answers. The
path to Lord Ram.
Shiva closed his eyes and took a deep breath as anxiety gnawed at his heart. What
would he find? Would he find peace? Would he find answers? Would he, as he hoped,
find that he had done some good? Good that wasn’t visible to him right now. Or would
he be told that he had made a terrible mistake and thousands had died a senseless
death? Shiva opened his eyes slowly, steeled himself and began walking, softly
repeating the name of the Lord.
Ram. Ram. Ram. Ram.
A little distance up, Shiva’s chant was disturbed. At an arched twist of the road, he saw
an old, shrivelled man, who appeared like he hadn’t eaten in weeks. He had a wound on
his ankle which had festered because of the humidity and neglect. He was dressed in a
torn jute sack, tied precariously at his waist and hung from his shoulders with a hemp
rope. Sitting on the sidewalk, his sinewy right hand scratched vigorously at his head,
disturbing the lice going about their job diligently. With his weak left hand, he
precariously balanced a banana leaf which held a piece of bread and gruel. It looked
like the kind of food distributed at cheap restaurants on the donations of a few kindly or
guilty souls. The kind of food that would not even be fed to animals in Meluha.
Intense anger surged through Shiva. This old man was begging, nay suffering, at the
doors of Lord Ram’s abode and nobody seemed to care. What kind of government
would treat its people like this? In Meluha, the government assiduously nurtured all its
citizens. There was enough food for everyone. Nobody was homeless. The government
actually worked. This old man would not have had to endure this humiliation if he lived
in Devagiri!
The anger in Shiva gave way to a flood of positive energy, as he realised that he had
found his answer.
He knew now that Parvateshwar
was right. Maybe the
Chandravanshis
were not evil, but they led a wretched existence. The Suryavanshi
system would improve their lives dramatically. There would be abundance and
prosperity all around when Parvateshwar
honed the moribund Chandravanshi
administration. There will be some good that will come out of this war. Maybe he had
not made such a terrible mistake. He thanked Lord Ram. He thought he had found his
answer.
Fate, however, conspired to deny Shiva this small consolation. The old beggar noticed
Shiva staring at him. Shiva’s sympathetic eyes and compassionate smile caused the
beggar’s haggard cheeks to spring to life, as he smiled in return. However, it wasn’t the
smile of a broken man begging for alms. It was the warm welcoming smile of a man at
peace with himself. Shiva was taken aback.
The old man smiled even more warmly while raising his weak hand with great effort.
‘Would you like some food, my son?’
Shiva was stunned. He felt small against the mighty heart of the wretched man he had
thought was deserving of pity and kindness.
Seeing Shiva gaping, the old man repeated, ‘Would you like to eat with me, son? There
is enough for both.’
An overwhelmed Shiva could not find the strength to speak. There wasn’t enough food
for even one man. Why was this man offering to share what little food he had? It didn’t
make sense.
Thinking Shiva to be hard of hearing, the old man spoke a litde louder. ‘My son, sit with
me. Eat.’

 Shiva struggled to find the strength to shake his head slightly. ‘No thank you, sir.’
The old man’s face fell immediately. ‘This is good food,’ he said, his eyes showing the
hurt he felt. ‘I would not offer it to you otherwise.’
Shiva realised that he had insulted the old man’s pride. He had just treated him like a
beggar. ‘No, no, that’s not what I meant. I know it’s good food. It’s just that I...’
The old man interrupted Shiva’s words with a warm grin. ‘Then sit with me, my son.’
Shiva nodded quietly. He sat down on the pavement. The old man turned towards Shiva
and placed the banana leaf on the ground, in between the two of them. Shiva looked at
the bread and watery gruel, which until moments back appeared unfit for humans. The
old man looked up at Shiva, his half blind eyes beaming. ‘Eat.’
Shiva picked up a small morsel of the bread, dipped it in the gruel and swallowed. It
slipped into his body easily, but weighed heavy on his soul. He could feel his
righteousness being squeezed out of him as the poor, old man beamed generously.
‘Come on, my son. If you are going to eat so litde, how will you maintain your big
muscular body?’
A starded Shiva glanced up at the old man; the circumference of those shrunken arms
would have been smaller than Shiva’s wrist. The old man was taking ridiculously small
bites, moving larger portions of the bread towards Shiva. Shiva could not find the heart
to look up any more. As his heart sank deeper and his tears rose, he ate the portion the
old man gave him quickly. The food was over in no time.
Freedom. Freedom for the wretched to also have dignity. Something impossible in
Meluha’s system of governance.
‘Are you full now, my son?’
Shiva nodded slowly, still not daring to look into the old man’s eyes.
‘Good. Go. It’s a long walk to the temple.’
Shiva looked up, bewildered at the astounding generosity being shown to him. The old
man’s sunken cheeks were spread wide as he smiled affectionately. He was on the
verge of starvation, and yet he had given practically all his food to a stranger. Shiva
cursed his own heart for the blasphemy he had committed. The blasphemy of thinking
that he could actually ‘save’ such a man. Shiva found himself bending forward, as if in
the volition of a greater power. He extended his arms and touched the feet of the old
man.
The old man raised his hand and touched Shiva’s head tenderly, blessing him. ‘May you
find what you are looking for, my son.’
Shiva got up, his heart heavy with tears of guilt, his throat choked with the cry of
remorse, his soul leaden and its self-righteousness
crushed by the old man’s
munificence. He knew his answer. What he had done was wrong. He had committed a
terrible mistake. These people were not evil.

  
CHAPTER 26
The Question of Questions
 
The road to the Ramjanmabhoomi temple clung to the sides of a gently sloping hill,
before ending its journey at Lord Ram’s abode. It afforded a breathtaking view of the
city below. But Shiva did not see it. Neither did he see the magnificent construction of
the gigantic temple or the gorgeously landscaped gardens around it. The temple was
sheer poetry, written in white marble, composed by the architect of the gods. The
architect had designed a grand staircase leading up to the main temple platform, which
appeared awe-inspiring, yet inviting. Colossal and ornate marble statues in sober blue
and grey had been engraved on the platform. Elaborately carved pillars supported an
ostentatious yet tasteful ceiling of blue marble. The architect obviously knew that Lord
Ram’s favourite time of the day was the morning. For on the ceiling, the morning sky, as
it would have been seen in the absence of the temple roof, had been lovingly painted.
On top of the ceiling, the temple spire shot upwards to a height of almost one hundred
metres, like a giant namaste to the gods. The Swadweepans,
to their credit, had not
forced their garish sensibilities on the temple. Its restrained beauty was in keeping with
the way the sober Lord Ram would have liked it.
Shiva did not notice any of this. Nor did he look at the intricately carved statues in the
inner sanctum. Lord Ram’s idol at the centre was surrounded by his beloveds. To the
right was his loving wife, Sita, and to the left was his devoted brother, Lakshman. At
their feet, on his knees, was Lord Ram’s most fervent and favourite disciple, Hanuman,
of the Vayuputra tribe, the sons of the Wind God .
Shiva could not find the strength to meet Lord Ram’s eyes. He feared the verdict he
would receive. He crouched behind a pillar, resting against it, grieving. When he
couldn’t control his intense feelings of guilt anymore, his eyes released the tears they
had been holding back. Shiva made desperate attempts to control his tears, but they
kept flowing as though a dam had burst. He bit into his balled fist, overcome by
remorse. He curled his legs up against his chest and rested his head on his knees.
Drowning in his sorrow, Shiva did not feel the compassionate hand on his shoulder.
Seeing no reaction, the hand squeezed his shoulder lightly. Shiva recognised the touch
but kept his head low. He did not want to appear weak, be seen with tears in his eyes.
The gentle hand, old and worn with age, withdrew quietly, while its owner waited
patiently until Shiva composed himself. When the time was right, he came forward and
sat down in front of him. A sombre Shiva did a formal namaste to the Pandit, who
looked almost exactly like the Pandits that Shiva had met at the Brahma temple at Meru
and the Mohan temple at Mohan Jo Daro. He sported a similar extensively flowing white
beard and a white mane. He wore a saffron dhoti and angvastram, just like the other
pandits. The wizened face had the same calm, welcoming smile. The only difference
was that this Pandit bore a considerably more generous waist.
‘Is it really so bad?’ asked the Pandit, his eyes narrowed and head tilted slightly, in the
typically Indian empathetic look.
Shiva shut his eyes and lowered his head again. The Pandit waited patiently for Shiva’s
reply. ‘You don’t know what I have done!’
‘I do know.’
Shiva looked up at the Pandit, his eyes full of surprise and shame.
‘I know what you have done, Oh Neelkanth,’ said the Pandit. ‘And I ask again, is it really

 so bad?’
‘Don’t call me the Neelkanth,’ glared Shiva. ‘I don’t deserve the tide. I have the blood of
thousands on my hands.’
‘Many more than thousands have died,’ said the Pandit. ‘Probably hundreds of
thousands. But you really think they wouldn’t have died if you hadn’t been around? Is
the blood really on your hands?’
‘Of course it is! It was my stupidity that led to this war. I had no idea what I was doing. A
responsibility was thrust upon me and I wasn’t worthy of it! Hundreds of thousands have
perished as a result!’
Shiva curled up his fist and pounded his forehead, desperately trying to soothe the
throbbing heat on his brow. The Pandit stared in mild surprise at the deep red blotch on
Shiva’s forehead, right between his eyes. It didn’t bear the colour of a blood clot. It was
a much deeper hue, almost black. The Pandit controlled his surprise and remained
silent. Now was not the correct time.
‘And it’s all because of me,’ moaned Shiva, his eyes moistening again. ‘It’s all my fault.’
‘Soldiers are Kshatriyas, my friend,’ said the Pandit, a picture of calm. ‘Nobody forces
them to die. They choose their path, knowing the risks. And the possible glory that
comes with it. The Neelkanth is not the kind of person on whom responsibility can be
thrust against his will. You chose
this. You were born for it.’
Shiva looked at the Pandit starded. His eyes seemed to ask, ‘Born for it?’
The Pandit ignored the question in Shiva’s eyes. ‘Everything happens for a reason. If
you are going through this turmoil, there is a divine plan behind it.’
‘What bloody divine reason can there be for so many deaths?’
‘The destruction of evil? Wouldn’t you say that is a very important reason?’
‘But I did not destroy evil!’ yelled Shiva. ‘These people aren’t evil. They’re just different .
Being different isn’t evil.’
The Pandit’s face broke into his typically enigmatic smile. ‘Exactly. They are not evil.
They are just different. You have realised it very quickly, my friend, a lot earlier than the
previous Mahadev.’
Shiva was perplexed by the Pandit’s words for an instant. ‘Lord Rudra?’
‘Yes! Lord Rudra.’
‘But he did destroy evil. He destroyed the Asuras.’
‘And, who said the Asuras were evil?’
‘I read it…’ Shiva stopped mid—sentence. He finally understood.
‘Yes,’ smiled the Pandit. ‘You have guessed it correctly. Just like the Suryavanshis and
the Chandravanshis see each other as evil, so did the Devas and the Asuras. So if you
are going to read a book written by the Devas, what do you think the Asuras are going
to be portrayed as?’
‘You mean they were just like today’s Suryavanshis and Chandravanshis?’
‘More so than you can imagine. The Devas and the Asuras, just like the
Chandravanshis and the Suryavanshis, represent two balancing life forces — a duality’
‘Duality?’
‘Yes, a duality that is one of the many perspectives of the universe — the masculine and
the feminine. The Asuras and the Suryavanshis stand for the masculine. The Devas and
the Chandravanshis speak for the feminine. The names change, but the life forces they
embody remain the same. They will always exist. There is no way that either can be
destroyed. Otherwise the universe will implode.’
‘And they see their fight with the other as the eternal struggle between good and evil.’
‘Exactly,’ beamed the Pandit, marvelling at Shiva’s keen mind even in this time of
distress. ‘But they haven’t been fighting all the time. Sometimes, there have been long
periods of cooperation as well. In times of strife, which usually happens when there is
evil, it is easiest to blame each other. A difference of opinion between two dissimilar

 ways of life gets portrayed as a fight between good and evil. Just because the
Chandravanshis
are different from the Suryavanshis doesn’t mean that they are evil.
Why do you think the Neelkanth had to be an outsider?’
‘So that he would not be biased towards any one point of view,’ said Shiva, as a veil
lifted before his eyes.
‘Exactly! The Neelkanth has to be above all this. He has to be devoid of any bias.’
‘But I was not beyond biases. I was convinced that the Chandravanshis are evil. Maybe
what Anandmayi says is right. Maybe I am naive, easily misled.’
‘Don’t be so hard on yourself, my friend. You cannot drop from the sky knowing
everything, can you? You would have to enter from any one side. And whichever side
you entered the equation from, you would obviously be coloured by their viewpoint,
seeing the other side as evil. You realized your error early. Lord Rudra did not recognise
it till it was almost too late. He had nearly destroyed the Asuras before he grasped the
simple fact that they were not evil, just different.’
‘Nearly destroyed them? You mean some Asuras still exist?’
The Pandit smiled mysteriously. ‘That conversation is for another time my friend. The
point you need to understand is that you are not the first Mahadev who was misled. And
you will not be the last. Imagine, if you will, what Lord Rudra’s feelings of guilt must
have been?’
Shiva kept quiet, his eyes downcast. The knowledge of Lord Rudra’s guilt did not
reduce the shame that racked his soul. Reading his thoughts, the Pandit continued.
‘You took the best decision you could take under the circumstances. I know this will be
cold comfort, but being the Neelkanth isn’t easy. You will have to bear the burden of this
guilt. I know the kind of person you are. It will be a heavy burden. Your challenge is not
to ignore the guilt or the pain. You have too good a heart to be able to do that. Your
challenge is to stay true to your karma, to your duty, in spite of the pain. That is the
fate and the duty of a Mahadev.’
‘But what kind of a Mahadev am I? Why am I required? How am I to destroy evil if I
don’t know what evil is?’
‘Who said your job is to destroy evil?’
A startled Shiva glared at the Pandit. He hated the irritating word games that these
pandits seemed to love.
Glimpsing the anger in Shiva’s eyes, the Pandit clarified immediately. ‘The strength that
evil has is overestimated, my friend. It is not so difficult to annihilate. All it takes is for a
few good men to decide that they will fight it. At practically all the times that evil has
raised its head, it has met the same fate. It has been destroyed.’
‘Then why am I required?’
‘You are required for the most crucial task: To answer that most important question.’
‘What?’
‘What is evil?’
‘What is evil? ’
‘Yes. Many wars have been fought between men,’ said the Pandit. ‘And many more will
be fought in the future. That is the way of the world. But it is only a Mahadev who
converts one of those wars into a battle between good and evil. It is only the Mahadev
who can recognise evil and lead men against it. Before evil raises its ugly head and
extinguishes all life.’
‘But how do I recognise evil?’
‘I can’t help you there my friend. I am not the Mahadev. This is a question you must find
the answer to. But you have the heart. You have the mind. Keep them open and evil will
appear before you.’
‘Appear?’
‘Yes,’ explained the Pandit. ‘Evil has a relationship with you. It will come to you. You

 have to keep your mind and your heart open so that you recognise it when it appears. I
have only one suggestion. Don’t be hasty in trying to recognise evil. Wait for it. It will
come to you.’
Shiva frowned. He looked down, trying to absorb the strange conversation. He turned
towards Lord Ram’s idol, seeking some direction. He did not find the judgemental eyes
he expected to see. Instead, he saw a warm, encouraging smile.
‘Your journey is not over, my friend. Not by a long shot. It has just begun. You have to
keep walking. Otherwise evil will triumph.’
Shiva’s eyes dried up a bit. His burden didn’t feel any lighter, but he felt strong enough
to carry it. He had to keep walking to the very end.
Shiva looked up at the Pandit and smiled weakly. ‘Who are you?’
The Pandit smiled. ‘I know the answer had been promised to you. And a vow by any of
us is a collective vow. I will not break it.’
Shiva gazed at the Pandit, waiting for the answer.
‘We are the Vasudevs.’
‘The Vasudevs?’
‘Yes. Each Vishnu leaves a tribe behind entrusted with two missions.’
Shiva continued to watch the Pandit intently.
‘The first mission is to help the next Mahadev, if and when he comes.’
‘And the second?’
‘The second is that one of us will become the next Vishnu, whenever we are required to
do so. The seventh Vishnu, Lord Ram, entrusted this task to his trusted lieutenant, Lord
Vasudev. We are his followers. We are the tribe of Vasudev.’
Shiva stared at the Pandit, absorbing the implications of this information. He frowned as
one inference suddenly occurred to him. ‘Did the Mahadevs also leave some tribes
behind? Did Lord Rudra?’
The Pandit smiled, deeply impressed by Shiva’s intellect. The Mohan Jo Daro Secretary
was correct. This man is capable of being a Mahadev .
‘Yes. Lord Rudra did leave behind a tribe. The tribe of Vayuputra.’
‘Vayuputra?’ asked Shiva. The name sounded oddly familiar.
The Pandit placed his hand on Shiva’s shoulder. ‘Leave this for another time, my friend.
I think we have spoken enough for today. Go home. You need your good wife’s
comforting embrace. Tomorrow is another day. And your mission can wait till then. For
now, go home.’
Shiva smiled. An enigmatic smile. Out of character with his simple Tibetan ways. But he
had become an Indian now. He leaned forward to touch the Pandit’s feet. The Pandit
placed his hand on his head to bless him, speaking gently, ‘Vijayibhav. Jai Guru
Vishwamitra. Jai Guru Vashishta.’
Shiva nodded, accepting the blessings with grace. He got up, turned and walked
towards the temple steps. At the edge of the platform, he turned around to look at the
Pandit once again. The Pandit sat on his haunches, touching his head reverentially to
the ground that Shiva had just vacated. Shiva smiled and shook his head slightly.
Looking beyond the Pandit, he gazed intently at the idol of Lord Ram. He put his hands
together in a namaste and paid his respects to the Lord.
His burden didn’t feel any tighter. But he felt strong enough to carry it.
He turned and started climbing down. At the bottom, he was surprised to find Sati
leaning against the statue of an apsara in the middle of the compound. He smiled.
There was nobody in the world whom he would rather see at this time.
Walking towards her, he teased, ‘Are you always going to follow me around?’
‘I know when you need to be alone,’ smiled Sati. ‘And when you need me.’
Shiva froze suddenly. He could see a robe flapping behind the trees, a short distance
from Sati. The light evening breeze gave away the position of the skulking man. Sati

 followed Shiva’s gaze and turned around. A robed figure, wearing a Holi mask, emerged
from behind the trees.
It is him!
Shiva’s heart started beating faster. He was still a considerable distance away from
Sati. The Naga was too close for comfort. The three stood rooted to their spots,
assessing the situation, evaluating the others next move. It was Sati who moved first.
Shifting quickly, she pulled a knife from her side-hold and flung it at the Naga. The Naga
barely stirred. The knife missed him narrowly, slamming hard into the tree behind him,
burying deep into the wood.
Shiva moved his hand slowly towards his sword.
The Naga reached behind, pulled the knife out of the tree and in a strange act, tied it
tightly to his right wrist with a cloth band. Then he moved, quickly.
‘Sati!’ screamed Shiva, as he drew his sword and started sprinting towards his wife,
pulling his shield forward as he ran.
…to be continued

  
Glossary
 

 Episode fromThe Secret of the Nagas
 

 
The Gates of Branga
 
‘Why are you back so soon? You have enough medicines for a year.’
Divodas was shocked at the manner in which Major Uma was speaking. She was
always strict. But never rude. He had been delighted that she had been posted on the
gates. Though he hadn’t met her in years, they had been friends a long time back. He
had thought he could use his friendship with her to gain easy passage into Branga.
‘What is the matter, Uma?’ asked Divodas.
‘It is Major Uma. I am on duty.’
‘I’m sorry Major. I meant no disrespect.’
‘I can’t let you go back unless you give me a good reason.’
‘Why would I need a reason to enter my own country?’
‘This is not your country anymore. You chose to abandon it. Kashi is your land. Go back
there.’
‘Major Uma, you know I had no choice. You know the risks to the life of my child in
Branga.’
‘You think those who live in Branga don’t? You think we don’t love our children? Yet we
choose to live in our own land. You suffer the consequences of your choice.’
Divodas realised this was getting nowhere. ‘I have to meet the King on a matter of
national importance.’
Uma narrowed her eyes. ‘Really? I guess the King has some important business
dealings with Kashi, right?’
Divodas breathed in deeply. ‘Major Uma, it is very important that I meet the King. You
must trust me.’
‘Unless you are carrying the Queen of the Nagas herself on one of your ships, I can’t
see anything important enough to let you through!’
‘I’m carrying someone far more important than the Queen of the Nagas.’
‘Kashi has really improved your sense of humour, Divodas,’ sneered Uma. ‘I suggest
you turn back and shine your supreme light somewhere else.’
The snide pun on Kashi’s name convinced Divodas that he was facing a changed Uma.
An angry and bitter Uma, incapable of listening to reason. He had no choice. He had to
get the Neelkanth. He knew Uma used to believe in the legend.
‘I’ll come back with the person more important than the Queen of the Nagas herself,’
said Divodas, turning to leave.

 
The small cutter had just docked at the Branga office. Divodas alit first. Followed by
Shiva, Parvateshwar, Bhagirath, Drapaku and Purvaka.
Uma, standing outside her office, sighed. ‘You really don’t give up, do you?’
‘This is very important, Major Uma,’ said Divodas.
Uma recognised Bhagirath. ‘Is this the person? You think I should break the rules for the
Prince of Ayodhya?’
‘He is the Prince of Swadweep, Major Uma. Don’t forget that. We send tribute to

 Ayodhya.’
‘So you are more loyal to Ayodhya as well now? How many times will you abandon
Branga?’
‘Major, in the name of Ayodhya, I respectfully ask you to let us pass,’ said Bhagirath,
trying hard not to lose his temper. He knew the Neelkanth did not want any bloodshed.
‘Our terms of the Ashwamedh treaty were very clear, Prince. We send you a tribute
annually. And Ayodhya never enters Branga. We have maintained our part of the
agreement. The orders to me are to help you maintain your part of the bargain.’
Shiva stepped forward. ‘If I may...’
Uma was at the end of her patience. She stepped forward and pushed Shiva. ‘Get out
of here.’
‘UMA!’ Divodas pulled out his sword.
Bhagirath, Parvateshwar, Drapaku and Purvaka too drew out their swords instantly.
‘I will kill your entire family for this blasphemy,’ swore Drapaku.
‘Wait!’ said Shiva, his arms spread wide, stopping his men.
Shiva turned towards Uma. She was staring at him. Shocked. The angvastram that he
had wrapped around his body for warmth had come undone, revealing his nee/ kanth,
the prophesied blue throat. The Branga soldiers around Uma immediately went down on
their knees, heads bowed in respect, tears flooding their eyes. Uma continued to stare,
her mouth half open.
Shiva cleared his throat. ‘I really need to pass through, Major Uma. May I request your
cooperation?’
Uma’s face turned mottled red. ‘Where the hell have you been?’
Shiva frowned.
Uma bent forward, tears in her eyes, banging her small fists on Shiva’s well-honed
chest. ‘Where the hell have you been? We have been waiting! We have been suffering!
Where the hell have you been?’
Shiva tried to hold Uma, to comfort her. But she sank down holding Shiva’s leg, wailing.
‘Where the hell have you been?’
A concerned Divodas turned to another Branga friend also posted at the border. His
friend whispered, ‘Last month, Major Uma lost her only child to the plague. Her husband
and she had conceived after years of trying. She was devastated.’
Divodas looked at Uma with empathy, understanding her angst. He couldn’t even begin
to imagine what would happen to him if he lost his baby.
Shiva, who had heard the entire conversation, squatted. He cradled Uma in the shelter
of his arms, as though trying to give her his strength.
‘Why didn’t you come earlier?’ Uma kept crying, inconsolable.

 
The entire crew on all five ships was crowded on the port and starboard side, watching
the operation in awe and wonder. Shiva’s men were totally astounded by the Branga
gates. They had seen the platform close in on their ship with frightening force. Then the
hooks were secured to the chains. The Brangas, after the go-ahead from respective
ship captains, began towing the fleet.
Shiva was standing aft. Looking at the office at the gate entrance.
Every Branga not working on the gate machinery was on his knees, paying obeisance
to the Neelkanth. But Shiva was staring at a broken woman curled up against the wall in
foetal position. She was still crying.
Shiva had tears in his eyes. He knew Uma believed that fate had cheated her daughter.
She believed that if the Neelkanth had arrived a month earlier, her child would still be
alive. But the Neelkanth himself was not so sure.

 What could I have done?
He continued to stare at Uma.
Holy Lake, give me strength. I will fight this plague.
The ground staff got the signal. They released the accumulator machines
pulleys began turning, moving the ship rapidly forward.
Seeing the vision of Uma retreating swiftly, Shiva whispered, ‘I’m sorry.’

and the

 Amish is a 36-year-old, IIM (Kolkata) educated boring banker turned happy author. The
success of his debut novel, The Immortals of Meluha (Book 1 of the Shiva Trilogy),
encouraged him to give up a fourteen-year-old career in financial services to focus on
writing. He is passionate about history, mythology and philosophy. He believes that
there is beauty and meaning in all world cultures and religions.

 
Amish lives in Mumbai with his wife Preeti and son Neel.

 
The second book of the Shiva Trilogy, The Secret of the Nagas,
released in 2011.
Amish is presently working on the third book of the Shiva Trilogy, The Oath of the
Vajuputras.

 
Know
more
about
Web:
www.shivatrilogy.com
Facebook:
www.facebook.com/shivatrilogy

the

Shiva

Trilogy

books

through:

 
Interact
with
Twitter:
www.twitter.com/amisht
Facebook:
www.facebook.com/authoramish

 

the

author

through:

  

 
